EDITH SOMERVILLE AND MARTIN ROSS
AN IRISH COUSIN.




PART I.

AN EXPERIMENT.




CHAPTER I.

THE “ALASKA."

    “In that new world which was the old."


There had been several days of thick, murky weather--dull, uncomplaining
days that bore their burden of fog and rain in monotonous endurance. Six
of such I had lived through; a passive existence, parcelled out to me by
the uncomprehended clanging of bells, and the, to me, still more
incomprehensible clatter which, recurring at regular intervals, told
that a hungry multitude were plying their knives and forks in the
saloon.

But a change had come at last; and on Saturday morning, instead of the
usual heaving ridges of grey water, I saw through the port-hole the
broken green glitter of sunlit waves. The s.s. Alaska's lurching
plunge had subsided into a smooth unimpeded rushing through the water,
and for the first time since I had left New York, the desire for food
and human companionship awoke in me.

“Stewardess," I said, “get me a cup of tea. I am going on deck."

It was early when I came on deck. The sun was still low in the
south-east, and was spreading a long road of rays toward us, up which
the big steamer was hurrying, dividing the radiancy into shining lines,
that writhed backwards from her bows till they were lost in the foaming
turmoil astern.

A light north wind was blowing from a low-lying coast on our left,
bringing, as I fancied, some faint suggestion of fields and woods. I
walked across the snowy deck, to where a sailor was engaged in a
sailor's seemingly invariable occupation of coiling a rope in a neat
circle.

“I suppose that is Ireland?" I said, pointing to the land.

“Yes, miss; that's the county Cork right enough. We'll be into
Queenstown in a matter of three hours now."

“Three hours more!" I said to myself, while I watched the headlands
slowly changing their shapes as we steamed past. It would soon begin
now, this new phase of my life, whether I wished it or not. It had once
seemed impossible; now it was inevitable. My destiny was no longer in my
own control, and its secret was, perhaps, hidden among those blue Irish
hills, which looked as if they were waiting for me to come and prove
what they had in store for me.

“Well, it has been my own doing," I thought; “whatever comes of it, I
have only myself to thank; and whether they like or dislike me, I shall
have to make the best of them, and they of me."

“First breakfast just ready, miss," said one of the innumerable
ship-stewards, scurrying past me with cups of tea on a tray.

I paid no attention to the suggestion, and made my way to a deck chair
just vacated by an elderly gentleman. I could not bring myself to go
below. The fresh sweet wind, the seagulls glancing against the blue sky,
the sunshine that gleamed broadly from the water and made a dazzling
mimic sun of each knob and point of brasswork about the ship,--to
exchange these for the fumes of bacon and eggs, and the undesired
conversation of some chance fellow-passenger, seemed out of the
question.

Moreover, I was too restless and excited to care about breakfast just
then. The sight of the land had given new life to expectations and hopes
from which most of the glory had departed during the ignominious misery
of the last six days. I lay in my deck chair, idly watching the black
river of smoke that streamed back from the funnels, and for the first
time found a certain dubious enjoyment in the motion of the vessel, as
she progressed with that slight roll in her gait which the sea confers
upon all its habitués.

Most people appear to think that sea-sickness, if spoken of at all,
should be treated as an involuntarily comic episode, to be dealt with in
a facetious manner. But for me it has only two aspects--the pathetic
and the revolting; the former being the point of view from which I
regard my own sufferings, and the latter having reference to those of
others. In the dark hours spent in my state-room, I had had abundant
opportunity to formulate and verify this theory, and I have never since
then seen any reason to depart from it.

[Illustration: text decoration]



[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER II.

AUNT JANE.

    “Sing Hey! when I preside."


It may not be a very dignified admission, but one of the main causes
that led to my being at present on board the Alaska, bound for
Queenstown, was the incompatibility of my temper with that of my Aunt
Jane.

In self-extenuation, I may mention that I had for the last twelve months
lived in her house, and had thus had ample opportunity of verifying the
opinion expressed by many of her most intimate friends--“That Jane
Farquharson was the salt of the earth, but as such was better when
taken in very small quantities."

She was a Scotchwoman of the most inflexible type. Twenty-five years of
sojourn in the United States had modified none of her insular
prejudices, and my mother, who was her youngest sister, had never, even
during her married life, lost belief in the awfulness of her authority.

The Farquharsons were a family whose pedigree was longer than their
purse; and when her younger brother, my Uncle James, had been compelled
to sell the paternal acres and emigrate to California, my aunt had
uprooted herself from her native land and followed his fortunes, in the
full conviction that he, excellent young man though he was, would become
altogether a castaway if once allowed out of range of her vigilant eye.
They were orphans, and Aunt Jane, having imposed upon herself the
duties of both parents, took my mother with her to the Far West, where
she maintained on my uncle's ranch the straitest traditions of the
elders.

Uncle James never married. Aunt Jane's vigilance had been so
conscientiously unremitting that no daughter of Heth had ever disputed
with her the position of mistress of Farquharson's ranch. But the
precautionary measures that had preserved Uncle James from the snares of
matrimony were a distinct failure in my mother's case. With the
unexpected revolt of a weak nature, she defied her elder sister, and
committed the incredible enormity of getting married.

Men--with the exception of a legendary Scotch minister, who, if
tradition spoke truly, had not long survived his betrothal to Aunt
Jane--were regarded by her as the natural foes of cleanliness, economy,
and piety. And of all men she considered Irishmen to be the epitome of
their sex's atrocities.

It must, then, be admitted that Fate dealt hardly with Aunt Jane, when,
one summer afternoon, her sister Helen came to her and told her that she
had that morning been married to Owen Sarsfield, the good-looking
Irishman who, a few months before, had entered into partnership with
their brother. My mother has often described the scene to me--how she
had found Aunt Jane grimly darning her brother's socks; how she had
received the news at first in terrible silence; and then how on my
mother, white and trembling, had fallen the thunders of her wrath.

“That ne'er-do-weel Irishman! A creature that 'tis well known had to
leave his home for Heaven only knows what wickedness! Did you never hear
that a bad son makes a bad husband? I was right when I warned James
against having anything to do with a vagabond scamp such as he is, and
told him no good would come of handling money that had doubtless been
won at the gaming-table!"

To all this, and much more, my mother did not attempt a reply; she
thought she knew more of Owen Sarsfield than her sister did. She and her
husband settled down in another house on the ranch, and, notwithstanding
their proximity to Aunt Jane, they were very happy.

My father, in spite of Aunt Jane's insinuations to the contrary, was an
Irish gentleman of good family, and the money which he had put into the
farm had been honestly come by. Perhaps my mother never knew the exact
reason of his leaving Ireland. She only told me that money troubles had
led to a quarrel with his father, Theodore Sarsfield, of Durrus, in the
county Cork. He had no sisters, and his younger and only brother,
Dominick, had sided with my grandfather against him, so that during the
fifteen years he had spent in America he was as much cut off from his
home as if he had been on another planet. The little that he knew of it
was gathered from a few misspelt letters, written by one Patrick Roche,
a special retainer of his in the old days at Durrus.

These reached him at long intervals, and usually announced some event
connected with the Sarsfield family. In this way he heard of his
brother's marriage, which took place three or four years before his own.
Then shortly afterwards, towards the end of the Irish famine, came the
news that “The young misthris was ded, and she just after havin' a fine
young son; 'twas what the peepel war all saying that the hard times kilt
her."

My mother used sometimes to take these letters from a little old green
velvet bag in which she hoarded many valueless treasures, and give them
to me to read. And I well remember the yellow worn papers, with the
half-foreign smell of turf-smoke lingering about them. I did not then
dream of how, in after-years, when that same smell of turf-smoke became
very familiar, it would recall the hours I spent when a child, sitting
in the shade of the verandah beside my mother's rocking-chair, and
poring with subdued excitement over these messages from the other side
of the world.

The last letter which my father received was as urgent as it was brief.


     “HONORED MASTHER OWEN" (it began, without any of the usual preamble
     of good wishes),

     “The owld masther is very sick. You'd do well to cum home. Ther is
     them that sayes he's askin' for you, and God knows maybe 'tis the
     change for deth that's on him. The family is very poor this while
     back. The big house do be mostly shut up; only owld Peggy Hourihane
     within in the house and her daughter mindin' the child. Me father
     and mother is ded. I will gos 'list for a sojer. God help us; these
     are bad times.

                         “Your faithful servant,

                                        “PATRICK ROCHE."


On getting this letter, my father started at once for Ireland. I was at
this time about a year old, a very ugly and stubborn little baby, so
Aunt Jane has often told me; and when my mother held me high above the
sunflowers at the gate, to kiss my hand to my father as he drove away, I
only beat her upon the head and screamed for the pussy.

That was the last chance I ever had of seeing my father. He wrote to my
mother from New York, and again from Queenstown--short dispirited
letters; the latter saying that he had caught a bad cold, and felt the
change from a Californian to an Irish winter very severely. A week
afterwards came another letter in a strange handwriting. It was from my
Uncle Dominick, and it told my mother, not unkindly, the news that she
never quite recovered from. The cold which my father had spoken of had
turned to pleurisy, and he had died in a hotel in Queenstown the day
after he landed. The writer said that, owing to the unfortunate
relations that existed between him and his brother, he had not been
aware of his marriage till letters that he had found in his possession
informed him of the fact. He now forwarded them to her, with his
brother's few personal effects, and remained, hers faithfully, D.
Sarsfield.

The next mail brought a second letter from my Uncle Dominick. Since he
last wrote, my grandfather had died; and by the terms of his will, in
consequence of my father having predeceased him, the property and house
of Durrus passed to the second son, the writer himself. “Had my father
known that my brother had married," wrote my uncle, he might possibly
have made an alteration in the terms of the will; but as Owen had never
seen fit to make any communication on the subject, no such provision was
made. “The property has suffered much during the recent famine, but, as
I feel sure that it would have been in accordance with my father's
wishes, I have ventured to place a small sum to your credit at the Bank
of Ireland, with directions to forward it to your order."

My mother never allowed the correspondence thus begun with my Uncle
Dominick to drop altogether, and once or twice a year she would devote a
couple of mornings to the toilful compilation of a letter to the
brother-in-law whom she had never seen. Looking back now, I think there
was something very touching in the confident way in which she relied on
his interest in those annals of my childhood which filled her letters. I
came upon them long afterwards, and read them with a strange mingling of
feeling, very different from the wonder and longing with which I, in
those childish days, saw them despatched on the first stage of their
long journey, and wished that I could accompany them into the post-bag's
grimy recesses, and go to Durrus too.

I had a very happy childhood. Either my mother or Uncle James could
single-handed have spoiled the best of children, and their joint
efforts being devoted to giving me everything I wished for, I should,
had it not been for Aunt Jane, have lived a life of lawless enjoyment.
The result of their long years of subjugation was a secret exultation in
the undaunted front which I bore towards my aunt, and at a very early
age I had learnt to recognize the fact that we three were confederates
against a common despot. Uncle James was my most daring ally, and at his
instigation I committed some of my most signal and spirited
misdemeanours. By the time I was sixteen, I had become, under his
supervision, a young lady of varied, if unusual, attainments. I could
catch and saddle my own horse; I could guide a steam-plough; I could
make some attempt at Latin verse; I knew a little about the rotation of
crops, and a good deal of Shakespeare and Walter Scott. Aunt Jane
herself took charge of my music, and I spent a daily hour of suffering
at a piano as upright and unsympathetic as she was, learning from the
frayed, discoloured pages of her music-books, the old-fashioned marches,
and “Scotch airs with variations," that had formed the taste of two
generations of Farquharsons.

I think my mother would have been satisfied to let me grow up as I was
then doing, knowing nothing of the usual more elegant accomplishments of
young ladies; and it was owing to Aunt Jane's abhorrence of my “tom-boy
tricks" that the first great change in my life was made. The climax came
one early summer morning, when, possessing myself of Uncle James's gun,
I crept out to try and slay one of the big “jack-rabbits" that abounded
on the ranch.

My aunt from her bedroom window saw the whole performance--the
stalking; the unseemly grovellings and crawlings through the long grass;
the deliberate aim; and, finally, the stealthy but triumphant return
with the spoil.

That very day it was decided that my mother and I were to go forthwith
to Boston, there to abide with a cousin of my mother's, until such time
as some of the high literary polish of that city should be imparted to
me.

“Perhaps Rachel Campbell will be given patience to bear with her wild
heathen-like ways," Aunt Jane had said; and my poor mother had answered
with a sigh--

“Theo is always good to me, dear Jane; but I dare say you are right, and
it will be best for us to go away."

So my mother and I set out on our long journey, little thinking that we
should never see Farquharson's Ranch again.

Towards the end of our second year in Boston Uncle James died. His horse
fell with him, throwing him on his head, and he only lived for a few
hours afterwards, never recovering consciousness. He left all his
property to my mother and my aunt; and the latter, having sold the
ranch, came to live with us in Boston.

My uncle's death was the first trouble that I had ever known; but in the
near future a still greater one awaited me. I was barely twenty-two when
my mother's unexpected death seemed to bring the whole world to a
standstill. I do not like to look back to the desolate days which
followed. She was all I had in the world to love, and Aunt Jane's stern,
undemonstrative nature would admit me to no fellowship of sorrow.

I dare say it may have been my own fault, but after a time I found the
change from my mother's unexacting governance to Aunt Jane's rule
becoming intolerable.

“Theodora has been quite ruined by poor Helen," she used, I believe, to
say to her friends. “She will do nothing now but what is right in her
own eyes. I shudder to think what will become of her."

Either my aunt's temper or mine had disimproved with advancing years,
and each day I found it harder to avoid a breach of the peace. At length
a diatribe upon “the fearful irreverence to my elders which I had learnt
in this godless town," ending with reflections upon my mother's
indulgence, aroused me to angry rejoinder.

I was trying to simmer down in my own room after the encounter, and in
my stormy trampings to and fro in that limited apartment, I had twice
upset a photograph of a plump and smiling little boy that stood on my
table.

“That horrid little Willy Sarsfield!" I said, delighted to find
something on which to expend my wrath; “he is always tumbling down!"

The picture had been my mother's, one which, at her request, had been
sent to her by my Uncle Dominick many years before; and as for the
second time I picked it up and put it in its place, an idea came to me.

“Why should I not go to Durrus?" I said.

I did not wait for a calmer moment, but, seating myself at the table, I
immediately began a letter to my Uncle Dominick. My hand shook from the
excitement of my suddenly taken resolution and from a sense of its
temerity, but I was at least able to make my meaning clear. I had, I
said, since I was a child, longed to visit Durrus, and see my father's
relations; but hitherto this had been impossible to me. Now, however, I
was comparatively alone in the world, and if my uncle would allow me to
pay him a visit, nothing remained to prevent my doing so.

That evening I told my aunt of the step I had taken. The heat of her
altercation with me had not yet died out in her, and, though she was, as
she said, beyond measure astounded, her pride did not permit her to
remonstrate.

“You can do as you please, Theodora. As your mother did not see fit to
leave me the control of your fortune, I do not presume to give an
opinion as to your movements. I trust, however, that you may not have
cause to regret the headstrong self-will which has made you unable to
content yourself in a quiet and God-fearing household."

During the days of waiting for an answer from my uncle, Aunt Jane
preserved the same demeanour of distant disapproval, and I began to
feel that to leave her house with the weight of her displeasure still
hanging over me, would be a strong measure. The morning at length came
on which I tore open an envelope with the Irish post-mark, and read to
her the ceremonious letter in which Uncle Dominick intimated his and his
son's great pleasure at the prospect of a visit from me.

“Very good; then I suppose you will start without delay." Her cold voice
quavered unexpectedly at the end of the sentence, and, looking up in
astonishment, I saw in her hard grey eyes an unmistakable moisture. “I
had no wish to drive you out, Theodora."

“I know, Aunt Jane," I broke in, in hasty penitence; “I never thought
that for an instant."

But she hurried away before I could get any further, saying
inarticulately, as she left the room, “God bless you, child, wherever
you go."

After this Aunt Jane made no further comment on what had taken place,
but we found ourselves on a more friendly footing than we had ever been
before; and when I said good-bye to her, I did so with the knowledge
that I could always rely on her undemonstrative, but steadfast
affection.

This is the history of how, on the 18th of October, 188-, I came to be
reclining in a deck chair on board the s.s. Alaska, two hours from
Queenstown.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER III.

MY COUSIN WILLY.

    “Willy's fair and Willy's rare,
     And Willy's wondrous bonny."


“To Miss Sarsfield, s.s. 'Alaska,' Queenstown. From W. Sarsfield.

“Awfully sorry I will not be able to meet you. Drive to Foley's Hotel.
Will be waiting you there."

       *       *       *       *       *

This despatch was put into my hand before I left the steamer at
Queenstown. Its genial tone and eccentric grammar were quite in keeping
with my ideas of an Irishman. These were at once simple and definite.
All Irishmen were genial; most of them were eccentric. In fact, had my
uncle and cousin met me on the pier, clad in knee-breeches and
tail-coats, and hailed me with what I believed to be the national
salutation “Begorra!" I should scarcely have been taken aback.

The outside car on which I drove from the Cork station to the hotel was
also a realization of preconceived ideas. In response to the bewildering
proffers of “Inside or outside?" I had selected an “outside," and was
quite satisfied with the genuineness of the difficulty I found in
remaining on it, as we rattled through the muddy streets. The carman
himself was perhaps a little disappointing. His replies to my questions
were not only devoid of that repartee which I had understood to be the
attribute of all Irish carmen, but were lacking in common intelligence;
and on his replying for the third time, “Faith, I dunno, miss," I
concluded I must have hit on an unlucky exception.

The day had lost none of the brilliancy of the early morning. It seemed
to me that the sun shone with a deliberate intention of welcome, and the
unfamiliar softness of Irish air was almost intoxicating. Everything was
conspiring to put me into the highest spirits, and I only laughed when
my new dressing-bag was flung on to the pavement by the dislocating jerk
with which the car pulled up in front of Foley's Hotel.

As I walked into the hotel, the porter who had taken in my boxes, went
over to a tall young man who was leaning over the bar at the end of the
narrow hall, and whispered something to him. He immediately started from
his lounging position, and, furtively glancing at the mirror behind the
bar, he came up to me.

“How do you do? I'm very glad to see you over here," he said, with an
evident effort to assume an easy cousinly manner. “I hope you didn't
mind not meeting me. I was awfully sorry I couldn't get down to
Queenstown, but I had important business in town." It was perhaps a
consciousness of the interested scrutiny of the young lady behind the
bar that caused him to blush an ingenuous red as he spoke. “You'd better
come on and have some luncheon," he continued, without giving me time to
answer him. “We've only got an hour before the train starts."

I followed him into the coffee-room, thinking as I did so how different
this well-dressed, rather awkward young man was from the picturesque and
vivacious creature I had somehow pictured my Irish cousin to be. His
accent, however, was unmistakably that of his native country; or,
rather, as I afterwards found, that of his particular part of it. His
quick, low way of speaking was at first a little unintelligible to me,
and almost gave me the idea that what he said was intended to be of a
confidential nature; but on the whole I thought his voice a singularly
pleasant one, and listened with interest to its friendly modulations.

By the time our luncheon was put on the table he was more at his ease,
and had even, with a sheepish, half-deprecating glance from his light
grey eyes, addressed me as “Theo." The almost fraternal familiarity of
the head waiter was, on Willy's explanation that I was his cousin from
America, extended in the fullest degree to me.

“Indeed, when I seen her coming in the door, I remarked to Miss Foley
how greatly the young lady favoured the Sarsfield family," he observed
blandly; “and Miss Foley said she considered she had a great likeness to
yourself, captain."

This was a little embarrassing. I did not quite know what I was expected
to say, and devoted myself to my mutton-chop.

“I did not know that you were a soldier," I said, as soon as the waiter
had gone.

“Oh, well," replied my cousin, giving a conscious twist to his yellow
moustache, “I'm only a sort of one--what they call 'a malicious man.'
I'm a captain in the West Cork Artillery Militia," he explained; “but
nobody calls me that but the buckeens hereabouts."

I wondered silently what a buckeen was, and why it should be so anxious
to maintain the prestige of the militia, but did not like to betray too
much ignorance of what might be one of the interesting old courtesy
titles peculiar to Ireland.

Looking at my cousin as he rapidly devoured his luncheon, I noticed
that, in spite of his disclaimer of military rank, he took some pains to
cultivate a martial appearance. His straw-coloured hair was clipped with
merciless precision, and on his sunburnt forehead, what was evidently a
cherished triangle of white marked the limit of protection afforded by
an artillery forage cap.

“I think I'd better be looking after your luggage now," he said, bolting
what remained of his second chop, and getting up from the table with his
mouth full. “I was quite frightened when I saw those two big mountains
of trunks coming along on the car after you. And then when I saw you
walk in"--he laughed a pleasant, foolish laugh--“I didn't think you'd
be such a swell!" he ended, with confiding friendliness.

The terminus of the Cork and Moycullen railway, the line by which we
were to travel to Durrus, was crowded on that Saturday afternoon. We had
ten minutes to spare, during which I sat at the window and watched with
the utmost interest the concourse on the platform. It had all the
appearance of a large social gathering or conversazione. Stragglers
wandered from group to group, showing an equal acquaintance with all,
and with apparently entire nonchalance as to the functions of the train,
while the guard himself bustled about among them with an interest that
was evidently quite unofficial. My carriage soon became thronged with
people, between whom and their friends on the platform a constant
traffic in brown-paper parcels was carried on; and I was beginning to
think there would be no room for Willy, who had disappeared in the
crowd. But the ringing of the final bell set my mind at rest.

Contrary to the usual usage, this sound had the effect of almost
emptying the train, and, the party in my carriage being reduced to two,
I realized that the travellers were left in a minority by those who had
come to bid them good-bye.

Willy returned at the last moment, emerging from the centre of a group
of young ladies, with the well-pleased air of one whose conversation has
been appreciated.

“Did you see those girls I was talking to?" he said, as we moved out of
the station. “They are cousins of the O'Neills, people in our part of
the world. They came down to see me off. There was a great mob there
to-day, but there always is on Saturday."

“Who are the O'Neills?" I asked, feeling that some response was expected
of me.

“They're neighbours of ours. They live at Clashmore--that's four miles
from us--and they're very nice people. Nugent, the brother, used to be a
great pal of mine--at least, he was till he went to Cambridge, and came
back thinking no one fit to speak to but himself."

Not feeling particularly interested in the O'Neills, I did not pursue
the subject; but Willy was full of conversation.

“I'm just after buying a grand little mare in Cork. It was that kept me
from going to meet you," he observed confidentially. “I suppose you
learnt to ride at your ranch, Theo? I tell you what! I bought her for
the governor, but she'd carry you flying, and you shall hunt her this
winter if you like."

My cousinly feeling for Willy increased perceptibly at this suggestion.

“But," I said, “if your father buys her, he will want to ride her
himself, won't he?"

“Is it the governor?"--with an intonation of contempt. “You never see
him on a horse's back. He's always humbugging in the house over papers
and books. I believe he used to be a great sportsman and fond of
society, but he never goes anywhere now."

The two ladies who had started from Cork with us had got out a station
or two afterwards, and we had the carriage to ourselves. But the
extraordinary jolting and rattling of the train were not conducive to
conversation, and, seeing that I was not inclined to talk, Willy
relapsed into the collar of his ulster and the Cork newspaper, and ended
by going unaffectedly to sleep.

It grew slowly darker. I sat watching the endless procession of small
fields slipping past the window, until the grey monotony of colour made
me dizzy. I leaned back, and, closing my eyes, tried to imagine the life
I was going to, and to contrast its probabilities with my past
experience. But a strange feeling of remoteness and unreality came upon
me. I suppose that the mental exhaustion caused by so many new sights
and impressions had dazed me, and I began to doubt that such a person as
Theo Sarsfield had ever really existed. Willy, my Uncle Dominick, and my
father flitted confusedly through my mind as inconsequently as people in
a dream. I myself seemed to have lost touch with the world; my past life
had slid away from me, and the future I had not yet grasped. I was a
solitary and aimless unit in the dark whirl that surrounded me, and the
sleeping figure at the opposite end of the carriage was a trick of
imagination, and as unreal as I. I became more and more remote from
things actual, and finally fell from all consciousness into a sleep as
sound as Willy's.

My slumbers were at length penetrated by a shriek from the engine. I sat
up, and saw that Willy was taking down his parcels from the rack; and in
another minute we were in the little station of Moycullen.

A hat with a cockade appeared at the window.

“Hullo, Mick. Is it the dog-cart they've sent?"

“'Tis the shut carriage, Masther Willy," said Mick; “and 'tis waiting
without in the street."

With some difficulty I followed Mick through the crowd of carts in the
station yard, to where a landau and pair were standing in the road. The
moonlight was bright enough for me to see the fine shapes of the big
brown horses, who were evincing so lively an interest in the movements
of the engine that the coachman had plenty to do to keep them quiet.

“You're welcome, miss," said that functionary, touching his hat; and I
got into the carriage, followed by Willy, with the usual number of
impedimenta that appear necessary to male travelling youth.

“It's a good long drive," he said, arranging rugs over our
knees--“twelve Irish miles. But we won't be very long getting there. You
won't have time to be tired of me--I hope not, anyhow."

This was more like my idea of the typical Irishman, but was,
nevertheless, rather discomposing from a comparative stranger. It was
said, moreover, with a certain conquering air, which plainly showed that
Willy was not accustomed to being found a bore. I could think of no very
effective reply, so I laughed vaguely, and said I hoped I should not.

We had been driving at a good pace for about an hour, when we left the
high-road and began the ascent of a long steep hill. At the top the
carriage turned a sharp corner, and I saw below me, on my right, a great
sheet of water all alight with the misty splendour of a full moon. Black
points of land cut their way into the expanse of mellow silver, and the
small islands were scattered like blots upon it.

“That's Roaring Water Bay," said Willy; “and that mountain over there's
called Croagh Keenan"--pointing to a shadowy mass that formed the
western limit of the bay. “You haven't anything to beat that in
America, I'll bet!" An assertion which I refrained from combatting.

Our road now lay for a mile or two along the top of a hill overlooking
the bay, and though Willy had done his best to make himself agreeable, I
was tired enough to be extremely glad when the carriage swung sharply
between high gate-posts, and we entered the avenue of Durrus.

As we passed the lodge, I caught, in the moonlight, a glimpse of the
pretty face of a girl who opened the gates, and asked who she was.

“She's the lodgekeeper's daughter," said my cousin.

“She looked very pretty."

“Yes, she's not bad looking," he said indifferently. “There are plenty
of good-looking girls in these parts."

The drive sloped down through a park to the level of a turf bog, which
it skirted for some distance, and then entered a thick clump of trees,
through which the moonlight only penetrated sufficiently to let me see
that they were growing in a species of reedy swamp, from which, on this
cold night, a low frosty mist was rising. We were soon out again into
the moonlight, the horses quickening up as they came near their
journey's end. I saw a sudden gleam of sea in front, and on the left a
long, low house, looking wan and ghostly in the moonlight.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IV.

THE MASTER OF DURRUS.

    “My father's brother; but no more like my father than I to Hercules."


As the carriage drew up at the hall door it was opened by a stout
elderly man, who came forward with such empressement that for a moment I
thought it was my uncle. Before, however, I had time to speak, he said
with much excitement--

“Your honour's welcome, Miss Sarsfield!"

Willy checked further remark on his part by shovelling our many parcels
into his arms; but as soon as we had got into the hall, he let them all
go, and caught hold of my hand and kissed it.

“Glory be to God that I should have lived to see this day! I never
thought I'd be bringing Masther Owen's child into this house. Thank God!
thank God!"

“Come, Roche, that will do for a start," said Willy, laughing. “Keep the
rest for another day. Here's the master."

Roche hastily let go my hand, as a tall bowed figure came across the
hall to meet me.

“Well, my dear Theodora, so you have found your way at last to these
western wilds," said my uncle, and kissed me on the forehead, taking
both my hands in his as he did so.

His manner was an extreme contrast to Willy's affable familiarity, and I
was struck by the absence of Irish accent in his voice, which had a
mellifluous propriety of intonation.

He led me into the room he had just left, a small library, and placed a
chair for me in front of the fireplace.

“You must be cold after your long journey. Sit down and warm yourself,"
he said politely, adding another log to the furnace that was blazing in
the old brass-mounted grate.

He rubbed his long white hands together and drew back, so as to let the
light of the lamp fall on my face.

“And your--a--relatives in America--you left them quite well, I hope? I
dare say they resent your desertion of them very bitterly?" He laughed a
little.

I made some perfunctory reply, and sat warming one frozen foot after the
other, while my uncle stood with his back to the lamp, and surveyed me
with guarded intentness.

I had expected him to be perhaps formal, in an old-world, courteous way;
but this strained and glacial geniality was a very different thing, and
disconcerted me considerably.

“How unlike he is to Willy! I wish he would not stare at me like that. I
don't think he is a bit glad to see me," I thought, with hasty
inconsequence. “Why does he not speak? Well, I will," and I made an
ordinary remark about my journey. My voice seemed to startle him from a
reverie. He put his hand to his eyes, and made some alteration in the
lamp before replying.

It was a distinct relief when, at this juncture, Willy came in, and
offered to show me the way to my room. We passed through the dark
entrance-hall, whose depths were inadequately lighted by a cheap lamp,
its orange light forming a dingy halo that contended hopelessly with the
surrounding gloom. At the end of the hall was a broad flight of stairs,
that at the first landing branched into two narrower flights leading to
a corridor running round the hall. Passing along one side of this
corridor, Willy opened a door at the end of it.

“Here you are," he said; “and I told them to bring you up a cup of tea;
I thought you looked as if you wanted it"--with which he took his
departure.

I was grateful for Willy's unexpected thoughtfulness in the matter of
the tea. My uncle's reception had chilled me. I was tired by my long
journey, and the darkness and silence of the house had a depressing
effect upon my spirits. For weeks this arrival at Durrus had been
constantly in my mind, and now that it was over, the only definite
emotions it seemed to have produced were disappointment and dejection.

I looked round me as I sipped my tea, and did not feel enlivened by what
I saw. The room was large and bare. The paper and the curtains of the
two windows were alike detestable in colour and pattern. The enormous
bed had once been a four-poster, but the posts had been cut down, and
four meaningless stumps bore witness to the mutilation it had undergone.
A colossal wardrobe loomed in a far-off corner; a round table of
preposterous size occupied the centre of the room. Six persons could
comfortably have dined at the dressing-table. In fact, the whole room
appeared to have been fitted up for the reception of a giantess, and was
quite out of proportion to my moderate stature of five feet seven.

I have always disliked more than one door in a bedroom, as it seems to
me to afford to ghosts and burglars unnecessary facilities; and my
dislike of my gaunt apartment reached its climax when I saw a door in
the corner on the farther side of the fireplace from the door into the
corridor. It had been papered over along with the walls, and its
consequent unobtrusiveness had almost the effect of intentional
concealment. I opened it, and found that it led into a moderate-sized
bedroom. The moonlight which came through the uncurtained window lay in
greenish-white patches on the uncarpeted floor, and showed a few pieces
of furniture, shrouded in sheets and huddled in one corner. In spite of
its chill bareness, an effect of recent occupancy was given to it by a
chair that stood sideways in the window with an air of definiteness, and
underneath and beside it I noticed a few tattered books.

I went back to my own room with an unexplainable shudder, slamming the
door behind me, and proceeded to dress for dinner with all speed.

With the unfailing punctuality of a newcomer, I left my room as the gong
sounded, and, hurrying down, found my uncle and Willy waiting for me in
the library.

The dining-room was a large and imposing room. A moderate number of
portraits of the most orthodox ancestral type hung, interspersed with
mezzotints of impassioned Irish clergymen, on its panelled walls. A high
old sideboard of what seemed to me an unusual shape stretched up to the
ceiling on one side of the room, and the plate upon it twinkled in the
blaze of the fire.

We sat down at the long table; and while Willy and his father were
absorbed in overcoming the usual embarrassments offered by soup to the
wearers of moustaches, I amused myself with speculations as to who was
responsible for the subtle combination of yellow and magenta dahlias
that adorned the table. I concluded that the artist must have been the
old butler, Roche; and as, at the thought, I involuntarily looked
towards him, I found his eyes fixed upon me with the abstracted gaze of
one who is trying to trace a likeness. Our eyes met, and he shuffled
away, but I felt sure that he had been searching for a resemblance to
the refined, well-cut, humorous face which, from a miniature of thirty
years ago, I knew must be what he remembered of my father.

“It is quite an unusual pleasure to Willy and me to see a charming young
lady at our bachelor-table--eh, Willy?" said Uncle Dominick, lifting his
face from his now empty soup-plate, and smiling at me.

Willy, whose flow of language seemed checked by his father's presence,
gave an assenting grunt.

“It is a long time since there has been a Miss Sarsfield at Durrus, and
it is thirty years since she died. You will find Willy and I are sad
barbarians, and we shall have to trust to you to civilize us."

I am singularly unfitted to deal with the compliments of elderly
gentlemen. On this occasion I failed as signally as usual to attain the
requisite quality of playful confusion, and diverted the conversation by
a question about a claret-coloured ancestor, who had been staring at me
from his frame over the fireplace ever since we had sat down to dinner.

“That is my grandfather," said my uncle. “Dick the Drinker, they called
him. He neither is nor was an ornament to the family; but his wife, the
beautiful Kate Coppinger, is worth looking at. In fact, my dear"--with
another smile and a little bow--“directly I saw you I was reminded of a
miniature which we have of her."

“I hope she looks Irish," I responded. “I have always tried to live up
to my idea of an Irish girl; but though my hair is dark, I haven't got
violet eyes."

“No, nor any one else either. I never heard of them out of a book," said
Willy, abruptly.

It was almost his first contribution to the conversation; but his father
took no more notice of him than if he had not spoken, and went on eating
his dinner, taking longer over each mouthful than any one I had ever
seen.

“Then, am I not like the Sarsfields?" I asked.

My uncle paused and looked hard at me for a second or two, letting his
heavy eyebrows drop over his eyes, with a peculiar change of
expression.

“In some ways, perhaps," he said shortly. Then, turning to Willy,
“Nugent O'Neill was here this afternoon to see you about the stopping of
some earths. I told him to come over and dine here some day next week.
Not"--turning to me--“that he is much of a ladies' man, but he is a
gentlemanlike young fellow enough; very unlike his father," he added, in
a bitter tone.

“Why, is Mr. O'Neill very objectionable?" I said.

I felt an unmistakable kick under the table, and Willy, with an
admonitory wink, slurred over my question by saying--

“I can tell you, O'Neill would be pretty mad if he heard you calling him
Mr. He's The O'Neill, and his wife's Madam O'Neill, and they
wouldn't call the queen their cousin."

My uncle silently continued his dinner, but I noticed how unpleasant his
expression had become since The O'Neill was mentioned.

I finally made up my mind that his face was one I should never care for.
He was decidedly a handsome man, though unusually old-looking for his
age, which could not have been more than sixty.

His thick dark eyebrows lay like a bar across his high forehead. A long
hooked nose drooped over an iron-grey moustache, which, when he smiled,
lifted in a peculiar way, and showed long and slightly prominent yellow
teeth. His unwholesomely pallid skin was deeply lined, and hung in folds
under the dark sunken eyes, giving a look of age which was further
contributed to by the stoop in his square shoulders. As I glanced from
him to Willy, I concluded that the latter's blonde commonplace good
looks must have been inherited from his mother.

Rousing himself from the morose silence into which he had fallen, my
uncle proceeded to apply himself to the task of entertaining me by a
dissertation on the trade and agriculture of California. I soon found
that he had all the desire to impart information which characterizes
those whose knowledge of a subject is taken from pamphlets; but I
listened with all politeness to his description of the country in which
I had lived most of my life. Willy maintained a discreet silence, but
from time to time bestowed on me glances of sympathy and approbation.
Evidently Willy did not know how to talk to his father.

As dinner progressed, I observed that, if Roche allowed his master's
glass to remain empty, he was at once given a sign to refill it, and my
uncle became more and more diffusely instructive.

During dessert a pause at length gave me an opportunity of changing the
conversation.

“I saw such a pretty girl at your gate lodge as we drove in," I said.
“She looked delightful in the moonlight, with a shawl thrown over her
head."

If Uncle Dominick had looked black at the mention of The O'Neill, he
became doubly so at this apparently inoffensive remark. Glancing for
explanation to Willy, I was amazed to see that he had become crimson,
and was elaborately trying to show his want of interest in the subject
by balancing a fork on the edge of his wine-glass.

“Yes," said my uncle; “she is a good-looking girl enough, and no one
knows it better than she does. When people in that class of life are
taken out of their proper place"--with great severity--“they at once
begin to presume."

Willy upset his wine-glass with a sudden jerk. For my part, I was so
taken aback by this tirade, that I thought my safest plan lay in
immediate flight. Willy got up with alacrity, and, following me from the
room, opened the drawing-room door. He looked confused and annoyed.

“Can you take care of yourself in there for a while?" he said. “I'll be
with you in a few minutes."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER V.

IMPRESSIONS

    “Groping in the windy stair,
     Darkness and the breath of space
     Like loud waters everywhere."


The room was cold, and I at once made for the fire, and, to my surprise,
found the hearthrug occupied by an untidy little girl, who was engaged
in dropping grease from a candle over the coals to make them burn. On
seeing me she sprang to her feet, and, with semi-articulate apologetic
murmurs, she gathered up a coal-box and retired in confusion.

I concluded that, improbable as it appeared, this was the
under-housemaid, and reflected with some astonishment on the
incongruities of the Durrus establishment. However, I afterwards found
she held no official position, but was a satellite of the
under-housemaid's, privately imported by her as a species of
body-servant or slave. In fact, at the risk of digressing, I may here
add that in process of time I discovered that the illicit apprenticeship
of a young relation was a common custom of the Durrus servants, and in
the labyrinthine remoteness of the servants' quarters they could be
concealed without fear of attracting the master's eye.

In spite of its top dressing of grease, the fire was not a tempting one
to sit over, and I roamed round the large ill-lighted room, taking in
with leisurely wonderment the style of its decorations. It was, in
startling contrast to the rest of the house, painted and papered in
semi-aesthetic hues, pale sage-green and pink being the prevailing
colours. This innovation of culture had not, however, extended itself to
the furniture, which was of the solidly ugly type prevalent fifty years
ago.

Heavy mahogany tables, each duly set forth with books and daguerrotypes,
stood inconveniently about, causing a congestion among the lesser
furniture. The pictures, which had been taken down at the repapering of
the room, leaned against the wall with their faces inwards. I turned one
of the nearest to me, expecting to come upon a family portrait, but
found it represented a Turk of truculent aspect, worked in Berlin
wool--a testimony to the amount of spare time at the disposal of the
ladies of Durrus. The thick coating of dust on my fingers which was the
result of this investigation did not encourage me to make any further
researches, and an examination of the old china on the marble cheffonier
between the windows had equally disastrous results. In one corner there
was an ancient grand piano, which to my astonishment proved to be in
good tune. I had not been playing for very long when Willy came in, and,
without speaking, placed himself beside me.

“Well, I declare!" he said, as I finished playing one of Schubert's
impromptus, “it's a long time since I heard that old piano. I got it
tuned the other day on purpose for you, and you know how to knock sparks
out of it, anyhow! I heard Henrietta O'Neill playing that piece once,
and it didn't sound half so well--though, I can tell you, she thinks no
end of herself."

“By-the-by, Willy, why did you stop me when I began to speak of Mr.
O'Neill?"

“O'Neill," corrected Willy.

“Oh, well, O'Neill," I said peevishly. “But what was the harm of
talking about him?"

“No harm, as far as I am concerned, but the governor hates him like
poison. I believe they had some row in my grand-father's time--I don't
know exactly what-and they never made it up since. But there's no
regular quarrel; I go to all their parties, and I think the governor
rather likes Nugent and the girls."

“What is Madam O'Neill like?"

“Oh, I get along with her first-rate," said Willy, stretching out one
of his long legs, and serenely studying the gold-embroidered clock on
his sock. “But other people say she's rather a bitter old pill; and I
can tell you, she has the two girls in great order!"

I began to play as he finished speaking; but his thoughts had travelled
on to my other unlucky remark at dinner, for he presently interrupted
me by saying in an uncertain way--

“Oh! you know that girl we were talking of at dinner, the one you saw at
the gate--Anstice Brian her name is--her mother is a bit queer in her
head, and she'd be very apt to give you a start if you didn't know her
ways. She's a harmless poor creature, but she wanders about these bright
nights, and she gets into the house sometimes."

I probably looked as alarmed as I felt, for he laughed protectingly,
and, drawing his chair a little closer to mine, said reassuringly--

“Never fear! She's not half as silly as they say; and do you think I'd
let her be about if there was any chance at all of her frightening you?"

“What is she like? Is she an old woman?"--ignoring the reproachful
warmth of this last observation.

“Is it old Moll Hourihane? She's as old as two men--or she looks it,
anyhow. She used to be my nurse till she went off her head."

“I thought you said her name was Brian," I said.

“That's only her husband's name. The women mostly stick to their own
names in this country when they're married."

“And you're quite sure she's not dangerous?" I said, feeling only half
reassured.

“No more than I am myself"--with a glance to see if I were going to
contradict this assertion. “She has a sort of dumb madness--like a
hound, you know--and she'll never speak; though I dare say after all
that's no great loss," he concluded.

I was by this time feeling very sleepy, and hoping I should soon be able
to escape to my own room, when the door opened, and my uncle came
solemnly in.

“I have come, Theodora, my dear, to suggest an early retirement on your
part."

He avoided looking at Willy, and I felt that the effects of my ill-timed
remarks at dinner had not yet died out. He looked haggard and troubled,
and a sudden pity and sense of kinship impelled me to raise my cheek
towards him as he took my hand to say good night. He stooped his head as
if to kiss me, but checked himself, and after an instant of hesitation
his moustache touched my forehead.

There was something repelling in his manner, but I felt that he was not
unconscious of the sympathy I had intended to express. He turned and
left the room, and I heard him go back to the library and shut himself
in, the sound of the closing door emphasizing his solitariness.

I went upstairs with the feeling of isolation again strongly upon me.
The wind had risen, and on the walls of the draughty corridor each gust
made the old pictures shake in their mouldering frames. At intervals,
through the panes of the large skylight overhead, the moon's light
dropped in pale wavering squares on the floor of the hall below. I
leaned over the balustrades watching the spectral alternations of light
and darkness, as the clouds swept across the moon, till the objects
beneath me seemed to take intermitting motion from the flitting of the
moonbeams.

As I looked, the dim lamp in the hall flickered and went out. A gust
from below circled round the corridor, lifting the hair upon my forehead
and almost extinguishing my candle as it passed me.

Perhaps I was overtired and nervous, but a causeless fear possessed
me--the old unreasoning dread of some vague pursuit out of the darkness,
that I had not felt since I was a child. I gave a terrified glance over
my shoulder at the swaying pictures, and then, shielding my candle with
my hand, I ignominiously ran down the corridor into my own room.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VI.

AN IRISH SUNDAY.

    “In Islington there was a man,
       Of whom the world might say,
     That still a godly race he ran,
       Whene'er he went to pray."


“Will you have your tay, plase, miss?"

The words at first mingled with the dreams which had all night disturbed
my sleep. On being repeated, the unfamiliar accent, accompanied by the
clink of a cup and saucer, made me open my eyes. A pleasant-looking,
red-haired girl was standing by my bed, tray in hand.

“You're after having a great sleep, miss. I was twice here before, and
there wasn't a stir out of you."

“Is it very late?" I asked, with an alarming recollection of my uncle's
punctuality.

“Oh, not at all, miss. The masther's only just after having his
breakfast."

“What!" I gasped. “You should have called me earlier."

“Oh, there's no hurry, miss! Sure he always ates his breakfast by
himself, and there's no sayin' how late it'll be before Masther Willy's
down."

Calmed by this assurance, I did not hurry myself over my dressing, but
from time to time stopped to look at the view from my windows.

It was a quiet October day, with a grey yet luminous sky, that lit with
a grave radiance the group of yellow elms that divided the avenue from
a heathery expanse of turf-bog, with low hills beyond. From the other
window, which was almost over the hall door, I could see to the left a
dark belt of trees that went round to the back of the house; and in
front, at the foot of the lawn, the curve of a little bay. This was
separated from the larger waters of Durrusmore Harbour by a low
promontory, along whose ridge a meagre line of fir trees was etched
against the grey sky. Leaning out of the window, and looking westwards
towards the mouth of the harbour, I saw the Atlantic lying broad and
white under the light of the soft clear morning.

I went downstairs, and as I passed along the corridor, I felt, even on
this still day, the air circulating freely through broken panes in the
skylight and the staircase window, making it easy to account for the
ghostly eddyings of the wind the night before.

Willy had apparently made an effort on my behalf at early rising, and I
found him making tea when I came into the dining-room. He came forward
to meet me with a complacency in which I detected a consciousness of the
added smartness of his Sunday attire; and, having satisfactorily
ascertained the fact that I had slept well, he installed me behind the
urn to pour out the superfluously strong tea which he had just brewed.

I experienced undeniable relief in the absence of Uncle Dominick, whom
at this moment I saw pacing up and down a walk leading from the house to
the sea. Willy saw the direction of my eyes.

“I hope you're not insulted by only me breakfasting with you," he said,
with ungrammatical gallantry. “You can breakfast with the governor
whenever you like, but you will have to be down at eight o'clock to do
that!"

I intimated with fitting politeness that I was satisfied with the
present arrangement, and we began our tête-à-tête meal in great amity.
Willy, indeed, was an excellent host. He plied me with everything on the
table, eating his own breakfast and talking all the time with unaffected
zest and vigour, and I began to feel as if the time I had known him
could be reckoned in months instead of hours.

The necessity of writing to announce my safe arrival to Aunt Jane was
one that had already forced itself upon my notice.

“I thought you'd be wanting to write a letter," Willy said, conducting
me into the drawing-room after breakfast, “and I got the place ready for
you."

I sat down at the old-fashioned writing-table, and found that he had
anticipated my wants with a lavish hand. Through the window I saw him, a
few minutes afterwards, sauntering down the drive towards the lodge,
smoking a cigarette, with two little white dogs flashing in circles
round him; and as I watched him, I came to the conclusion that at first
sight I had underestimated my cousin.

There was something to me half amusing and half touching in the anxiety
of his little housewifely attentions to me. He was really unusually
thoughtful for others; from various things he had said, it was evident
that his father had allowed the whole management of the place to devolve
on him, and I fell to idle speculation as to whether he ordered dinner,
and if he were particular about the housemaids wearing white muslin
caps; and I was only aroused from these, and other equally interesting
reflections by hearing the clock strike the hour at which I had been
warned I must get ready for church.

My uncle was standing on the steps, with his Prayer-book in his hand,
when I came downstairs. He wished me good morning, with a polite apology
for not having met me at breakfast, and stood looking about him, with
eyelids narrowed by the white glare from the sea, till a minute
afterwards the wagonnette in which we were going to church came to the
door. My uncle and I got in behind; while Willy, with Mick by his side,
sat on the box and drove. Once outside the gate, we took a road running
at right angles to that by which I had arrived. It went round the head
of Durrusmore Harbour, and, leaving the sea behind, turned inland
through large woods, which my uncle told me were part of the demesne of
Clashmore, The O'Neill's place.

The road was level, and soft with the fallen red beech leaves, and the
brown horses took us along it at a pace that showed they were none the
worse for their journey the night before. The rough stone walls on
either side of the road were covered with moss and small ferns. Here and
there the wood was pierced by narrow rides--vistas in which the clumps
of withering bracken repeated the brown and gold of the trees above.

“We're going to draw this place on Friday," said Willy, pausing in the
steady flow of his conversation with Mick to give me the information.
“Blackthorn will carry Miss Theo right enough, wouldn't he, Mick? and
I'll ride the new mare."

The village of Rathbarry, which we had now entered, consisted of a
single street of low, dirty-looking cottages, their squalid uniformity
varied at frequent intervals by the more prosperous shuttered face of a
public-house. At the end of the street, a gateway led into a graveyard,
surrounded by ill-thriven elm trees, in the middle of which stood the
church. It was an ugly, oblong building, with a square tower at the west
end, from which proceeded a clanging as of a cracked basin battered with
a spoon.

“We're in good time," said Willy, drawing up with a flourish before the
porch. “That's the hurry-bell only begun now, so we've five minutes to
spare. Look, Theo! there's the Clashmore carriage. Did you ever see such
brutes as those chestnuts?"

Before, however, I had time to reply, Uncle Dominick hurried me into the
church, and we took our places in opposite corners of a singularly
uncomfortable square pew. As we sat confronting each other in the
half-empty church, we heard in the porch Willy's voice raised in
agreeable converse. Apparently his remarks were of a complimentary sort,
for a girl's voice rejoined, “Oh, nonsense, Willy!" with a laugh.

“Disgraceful!" muttered my uncle, under his breath; and the next moment
three ladies swept up the aisle, followed by Willy, on whose face still
beamed a slightly fatuous smile.

He immediately sat down beside me, and in a rapid whisper instructed me
as to the more prominent members of the congregation.

“Those are the O'Neills"--indicating the ladies he had come in with.
“Connie's the little fair one. And look! those are the Jackson Crolys!
You'd better sit up and behave, as they'll be watching you all the
time. I know they all want to see what you're like!"

“Hush! don't talk!" I whispered back. “Here's the clergyman."

The service was very long. The music, which consisted of the clergyman's
daughter accompanying herself on a harmonium, with casual vocal
assistance from a couple of school-children, was of an unexhilarating
kind. Willy fidgeted, admired his boots, trimmed his nails, and tried to
utilize every possible opening for conversation. Uncle Dominick, on the
contrary, devoted his whole attention to the service, and answered all
the responses with austere punctiliousness, even going so far as to try
and track the clergyman's daughter in her devious course through the
hymns.

From the corner which had been allotted to me in my uncle's pew I could
not see the clergyman, and, though his voice resounded through the
church, his very pronounced Cork accent made it difficult for me to
understand more than a word here and there in his discourse.

The high sides of the pew debarred me from even the solace of inspecting
the congregation, and, in the absence of other occupation, I could not
altogether conceal the interest that I felt in the remark which Willy
was laboriously spelling on his fingers for my edification. Becoming
conscious, however, that Uncle Dominick's eye, while fixed upon the
preacher, had included us in its observations, I transferred my
attention to the mural tablets, which on either side of the church set
forth the perfections of dead-and-gone O'Neills and Sarsfields.

Having studied these for a few minutes with the mild sceptical interest
usually excited by the tabulated virtues of the unknown departed, I
leaned back in my corner, and, in doing so, noticed a brass upon the
wall slightly behind my uncle's seat. My eye was immediately caught by
my father's name.

                             IN MEMORIAM.

                      THEODORE WILLIAM SARSFIELD,

                        WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE
                           JANUARY 10, 185-.

                                AND OF

                            OWEN SARSFIELD,

                           SON OF THE ABOVE,
                      WHO DIED SUDDENLY IN CORK,
                      ON HIS RETURN FROM AMERICA,
                           JANUARY 9, 185-.

                   *       *       *       *       *

            THIS MONUMENT IS ERECTED BY THEIR SORROWING SON
              AND BROTHER, DOMINICK SARSFIELD, OF DURRUS.

I glanced by a natural transition to my uncle, whose head all but
intervened between me and the brass. His expression of sombre
melancholy harmonized well with the words “his sorrowing brother."

I could guess what must have been his grief at the death of an only
brother, from whom he had been perforce alienated. Till then I had
scarcely realized how closely linked their lives must once have been,
and I resolved that his chilly manner should not deter me from some day
inducing him to speak to me of my father.

As I made up my mind to this, the clergyman's voice ceased, and the
congregation rose at the end of the sermon. We walked out of church
close behind the O'Neills, and outside the porch Madam O'Neill stopped
to shake hands with my uncle. Then, turning to me--

“I need not ask to be introduced to you, my dear. I knew your poor
father very well indeed in days gone by." This was said in a dry
attenuated voice, but through the elaborate pattern of her Maltese lace
veil, her eyes looked kindly at me. She was small and refined looking,
with little artificial airs and graces which told that she had been a
beauty in her day; and what remained of a delicate complexion was
carefully sheltered from the harmless light of the grey sky by a thick
parasol.

Uncle Dominick's impatience to get away only gave me time to say a word
or two in answer to her salutation.

“Come, Theodora," he said, with the smile that lifted his moustache and
showed all his teeth. “We must not keep the horses waiting;" and bidding
the madam and her two daughters, who had been standing behind her,
good-bye, he led the way down to the gate.

Willy was already on the box of the wagonnette, and was talking to a
dark, quiet-looking young man who was standing with one foot on the
wheel.

“Then you'll see about having those earths stopped," Willy said, leaning
over, and emphasizing what he was saying with the handle of the whip on
his hearer's shoulder. “Oh, here they are! Theo, let me introduce Mr.
O'Neill. I was just telling him he must be sure and have a fox for you
at Clashmore this week."

“I shall do my best," said Mr. O'Neill, as he took off his hat; but he
did not look particularly enthusiastic as he spoke.

We had no sooner driven off, than Willy twisted round on the box to
speak to me.

“Well, what do you think of Nugent?" he said rather eagerly.

“He is nice looking," I replied critically; “but I do not like his
expression. I cannot say he is what I should call either cheerful or
agreeable looking."

“Oh, he's not half a bad chap," said Willy, with a leniency which was
possibly the result of the pleasure with which young men listen to the
depreciation of their fellows. “He's jolly enough sometimes; but he can
put on a bit of side when he likes, and I dare say he thinks he is
thrown away down here. Henrietta's like him in that sort of way, but
Connie has no nonsense about her."

I decided that Connie's was the laugh that I had heard in the porch
before service, and thought that of the two I should be more likely to
prefer Henrietta.

Ever since we had left church the sky had been darkening, and when we
reached Durrusmore Harbour, the distant headlands were almost hidden in
a white mist. The south-west wind blew it towards us from the sea, and
by the time we got home a thick fine rain was coming steadily down.

Lunch, with Uncle Dominick at the head of the table, was a more serious
business than breakfast had been, and old Roche's shuffling
ministrations added to the general solemnity. I was, however, amused by
the affectionate solicitude with which he nudged me in the elbow with
the dish of potatoes, indicating with his thumb a specially floury one,
and concluded that this was the singular method he took of showing that
his regard for my father had extended itself to me.

When lunch was over Willy announced his intention of walking to
Clashmore, to see about borrowing a side-saddle for me, he said--an act
of self-sacrifice which I was not slow to attribute to the fascinations
of Miss Connie O'Neill. Uncle Dominick retired to a private den at the
end of a dark passage leading from the hall to the back of the house;
and a few minutes later, Willy, in a voluminous mackintosh, set forth
on his errand, followed by the fox terriers in a state of amiable
frenzy, the result of the abhorred Sunday morning incarceration. I
became aware that I was thrown upon my own resources, and, with the
prospect of a wet afternoon before me, I felt my spirits sinking
perceptibly.

To finish my letter to Aunt Jane was at least better than doing nothing.
I took up a strong position in front of the library fire, and
disconsolately applied myself to filling the big sheet of foreign paper
on which I had embarked in the morning.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VII.

MOLL.

    “Or in the night, imagining some fear,
     How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear!"


Willy did not come home till dinner-time, when he reappeared in
exceedingly good humour. I, on the contrary, felt the vague ill-temper
of a person who has spent a wet Sunday afternoon in solitude, and I
found dinner long and dull. In the drawing-room after dinner, I sought
the resource of music to raise my spirits; but I was debarred from even
this last consolation, for Willy implored me to “let the piano alone,"
as his father disapproved of music on Sunday.

We finally settled down in armchairs by the fire, and I discovered that
Willy possessed in a high degree the feminine faculty of sitting over a
fire and talking about nothing in particular. He pretended to no
superiority to the minor gossip which forms the ripples in the current
of country life, and he had quite a special gift of recounting small
facts with accuracy and detail, and without any endeavour to exalt his
talent as a story-teller. His tales had, in consequence, a certain
intrinsic freshness and merit, and till bedtime we maintained a
desultory, but on the whole interesting conversation.

When I got up to my room, I found it full of smoke and extremely cold.
The window had been opened to let out the smoke, and the chintz curtains
rustled and flapped in the draught. Making up my mind after a few
minutes that even turf smoke was preferable to the cold disquiet of the
wind, I went to the window to close it, and noticed with a good deal of
amusement that, the pulley being broken, the housemaid had supported the
sash with one of my brushes.

There was something in this misplaced ingenuity which was eminently
characteristic of the slipshod manner of life at Durrus, and by force of
contrast my thoughts travelled back to my mother's orderly household. I
leaned against the shutter and looked out, beset by poignant
recollections of a time when life without my mother seemed an
impossibility, and when Durrus was no more to me than a place in a fairy
story.

The wind had blown away most of the fog, and the rain had ceased, but a
thin haze still blunted the keenness of the moonlight. I gazed at the
dark shapes of the trees in the shrubbery till I lost the sense of their
reality, and they came and went like dreams in the uncertain light. In
my ears was still the throb and tremor which seven days and nights spent
in listening to the screw of the Alaska had imprinted on my brain, and
my thoughts and surroundings seemed alike hurrying on in time to its
pulsations. I was at length roused to realities by a sound which at
first seemed part of the light chafing of the laurel leaves, but which
in a few moments became detached and distinct from the vague noises of
the autumn night.

It came nearer, and gave the impression of some stealthy advance in the
wet grass under the trees. At length, at the verge of their shadow, just
opposite my window, I heard the gravel crunch under a soft footstep.
The next instant a woman's figure slid into the dim light, and came out
across the broad gravel sweep with a rhythmical swaying gait, as though
moving to music.

Half-way to the house she stopped, and, raising her arms above her head
with a wild gesture, she began to step to and fro with jaunty liftings
and bendings of her body, as though she were taking part in a dance.
Backwards and forwards she paced with measured precision; then, placing
her hands on her hips, she danced with fantastic lightness and vigour
some steps of an Irish jig. Suddenly, however, she checked herself; she
knelt down, and, turning a pale face to the sky, she crossed her hands
on her breast and remained motionless.

Her absolute stillness had in it an intensity almost more dreadful than
the strange movements she had previously gone through, and I stood
staring in inert terror at the grey kneeling figure, with a face as
white as that which was still turned rigidly skywards in what appeared
to be the extremity of supplication. Just then the moon shone sharply
out, hardening and fixing in a moment the limits of light and darkness,
and, as if with a sudden movement, it flung the shadow of the praying
woman on the ground before her. She started, and slowly rose to her
feet, and, with her hands still crossed on her bosom, turned her face
towards me. I saw the moonlight glisten in her wide-open eyes, which
were fixed, not on me, but on the window of the room next to mine. Then
opening her arms wide, she let them fall to her side with an extravagant
obeisance, and sidled back into the impenetrable shadow of the trees.

There was I know not what unearthly suggestion about this weird dance
and agonized devotion, that seemed to paralyze my mind, and render it
incapable of any thought except fear. I stood bewilderedly looking at
the spot where the darkness had swallowed up her figure; but before I
had time to collect my ideas, she reappeared at a little distance, and,
as well as I could see, turned up a path which led through the shrubbery
in the direction of the lodge.

As she passed out of sight, I suddenly remembered what Willy had said to
me about Anstey's half-witted mother. This strange dancer was, then, no
ghost nor dream-creature, sent on a special errand to me, as I had first
feared, and then, with returning courage, had almost hoped might be the
case.

She was only “old Moll Hourihane." It was a simple explanation, and
perhaps a humiliating one; but, in spite of my anxiety to possess a
ghost-story of my own, I accepted it with relief. I shut the window and
locked my door, and, though still trembling all over with cold and
excitement, I went to bed, thankful that “Mad Moll" had introduced
herself to me from without, instead of first appearing to me within the
walls of Durrus.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VIII.

SCHOOLING.

    “Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
     How went he under him?"

    “This is the prettiest low-born lass----"


“And so she gave you a great fright? Well, now, wasn't that too bad? I
wish I'd caught her at her tricks, and I'd soon have packed her about
her business. You know, they say she was the best step-dancer in the
country when she was a girl; and to think of her going dancing under
your window, and you taking her for a ghost!"

Willy's amusement overcame his sympathy, and he laughed loud and long.

I had been impelled to confide my alarm of Sunday night to him when we
were on our way round to the stables to see the horses, on the following
morning, and I now rather resented his refusal to see anything but the
ludicrous side of the incident.

“You are very unsympathetic. I am sure you would have been just as
frightened as I was," I said. “She looked exactly like a ghost; and in
any case I should like to know why she selected my window to dance
under?"

“She meant it for a compliment, of course. I suppose she thought you'd
be a good audience. I've seen her now and again jack-acting there in
front of the house, but I'm afraid all I said was to tell her go home.
But then, I'm not sympathetic like you!"

We had stopped to discuss the point at the spot whence I had seen Moll
emerge, and now walked on past the untidy old flower-garden to the yard.

It was a large square, of which three sides were formed by stables and
cowhouses, the house itself being the fourth, and was only redeemed from
absolute ugliness by a row of four great horse-chestnut trees, which
grew out of a grassy mound in the middle. We arrived in time to surprise
the two little fox terriers, Pat and Jinny, in the clandestine enjoyment
of a meal with the pig, whose trough was conveniently placed by the
scullery door. On seeing us, they at once endeavoured to dissemble their
guilty confusion by an unworthy attack on their late entertainer. This
histrionic display did not, however, deceive Willy in the least. The
dogs were ignominiously called off, and the pig was left master of the
situation.

I wondered, as I looked round, if all Irish yards were like this one.
Certainly I had never before seen anything like the mixture of
prosperity and dilapidation in these solid stone buildings, with their
ricketty doors and broken windows. Through the open coach-house door I
saw an unusual amount of carriages, foremost among them the landau in
which I had driven from Moycullen, with a bucket placed on its coach-box
in order to catch a drip from the roof. A donkey and a couple of calves
were roaming placidly about, and, though there was evidently no lack of
stable-helpers and hangers-on, everything was inconceivably dirty and
untidy.

The horses were, however, well housed and cared for. My future mount,
“Blackthorn," was the first to be displayed. He was a big black horse,
with an arched back and an ugly head; but he had a look of power and
intelligence which provided me with materials for a sufficiently
laudatory criticism. In the next box, the bay mare Willy had bought in
Cork was pushing her nose through the bars over the door to attract our
attention.

“That's the one kept me from going to meet you at Queenstown," said
Willy, opening the door, and catching the mare by the head. “She's a
nice little thing, but I'll know better another time than to throw you
over for her. Stand, mare!"--as that animal made a vigorous remonstrance
at being deprived of her sheet.

“She looks as if she knows how to go," I said. “What are you going to
call her?"

“Don't you think you might christen her for me?" Willy answered, with an
insinuating glance at me from under his black eyelashes. “Just to show
you don't bear malice for my leaving you to cross Cork all alone."

Notwithstanding the access of brogue with which this was said, there was
something in the look which accompanied it at which, to my extreme
annoyance, I felt my colour rise.

“Of course I don't bear malice. I never even expected you to meet me," I
said, turning to stroke the mare's shoulder. “If you really want a name
for her, suppose you call her 'Alaska.' That was the steamer I came over
in, and they say she's the fastest on the line."

Willy received this moderate suggestion with enthusiasm. “If she turns
out half as good as she looks," he said, as we walked out of the yard,
“you shall have her for yourself to ride."

“I think you are very rash to put me up on your horses when you don't
in the least know how I can ride."

“Ah! well, I'll trust you; though, indeed, after the funk you were put
into by poor old Moll, I suppose I may expect to see you turning back at
the first fence."

To this sally I vouchsafed no reply.

“I must take the mare out this afternoon," he continued, “to try can she
jump. Blackthorn wants shoeing, or you should ride him; but I thought
perhaps you'd like to walk up to the farm to see me schooling the mare.
It's only as far as those fields opposite the lodge that I'll go."

This was, I thought, a very good suggestion. A prospective day with the
hounds made me anxious to see what Irish fences were like, and we
settled to start early in the afternoon.

At lunch Uncle Dominick was more conversational than I had yet seen
him.

“What have you been doing with yourself this morning, Theo, my
dear?"--for the first time adopting the more familiar form of my name.
“The roses in your cheeks do credit to our Irish air."

Uncle Dominick's faded gallantry always had the effect of making me shy
and constrained. I laughed nervously, and before I could reply Willy
struck in--

“She was round to the stables with me, sir."

“Oho! so that was it, was it?" said my uncle, with the smile I disliked
so much; and I felt that at that moment my cheeks more resembled peonies
than roses.

“I was showing her the new mare," said Willy, “and we're going to call
her 'Alaska,' because that's the ship that"--here he stopped--“because
that's the fastest ship between this and America."

“Why, is not that the vessel that brought you to us from America?" said
Uncle Dominick, pursuing his advantage with unexpected facetiousness. “I
think it is an admirable name, and will always have pleasant
associations for you and me, eh, Willy?"

Willy made no reply, and my uncle rose from the table, apparently well
satisfied with himself, and left the room humming a tune.

It was a softly brilliant afternoon. I thought, as I started for the
farm where I was to see Alaska put through her paces, that I had never,
even in America, seen anything like the glow of the yellow leaves
against the blue sky--a blue so intense that it seemed to press through
the half-stripped branches. The thick drifts of fallen leaves rustled
like water about my feet, and floated on the surface of the pools which
the rain of yesterday had formed in the low swampy ground under the
clump of elms at the bend of the avenue. Just here a deep dyke ran
parallel with the drive, separating it from the turf bog which I had
seen from my bedroom window. Across it was a rough bridge of logs, from
which a raised cart-track wound over the bog like a long brown serpent.
I crossed the bridge and leaned upon the rusty iron gate that closed the
approach to the bog road. The keen scent of the sea came to me across
the heathery expanse, mingled with the pure perfume of the peat, and I
regretted that my promise to Willy prevented me from following the
meandering course of the cart-track over the headland, to where I heard
the hollow draw of the sea on the rocks at the other side.

Retracing my steps, I went up the avenue, and found Willy with the two
dogs waiting for me outside the gate. In the fence on the other side of
the road was an opening partially filled by a low wall of loose
stones--locally called a gap.

“I'll take her in at this gap," Willy said, turning the mare to give her
room, and then putting her at the gap. Alaska, however, had probably her
own reasons for preferring the road, for she refused with a vicious
swerve, and a lively contest between her and her rider ensued.

The latter's difficulties were considerably complicated by Pat and
Jinny, who, with ostentatious activity, insisted on crossing and
recrossing the gap at the most critical moments. When Jinny at length
took up a commanding position on its top-most stone, in order to watch,
with palpitating interest and ejaculatory yelps, Alaska's misbehaviour,
Willy's temper gave way.

“Theo," he said, with suppressed fury, “will you for goodness' sake
take that--that infernal dog out of my way?"

I captured Jinny, and held her wriggling in my arms, until at length
Alaska, with a bound that would have cleared a five-barred gate, went
into the field.

I climbed on to a gate-post, from whence I could conveniently see the
schooling process. Willy was a fine rider, and Alaska acquitted herself
very creditably; but after a quarter of an hour spent on my gate-post, I
began to find it rather cold, and, Willy having gone to more distant
fields in search of further educational difficulties, I decided to go
home without him. Outside the gates was a large gravel sweep, with high
flanking walls, forming a semicircular approach, and in these, at some
height from the ground, several niches had been made, large enough to
hold life-sized figures. As I turned to get down, I saw that a young
girl was standing in one of the niches. She was leaning slightly
forward, steadying herself with one hand on the wall, while with the
other she shaded her eyes, as if looking after Willy's departing figure.

On seeing me, she jumped quickly down, and ran to open one of the small
gates. I recognized the shy, pretty face of Anstey Brian, and stopped
inside the gate to speak to her.

“If Mr. Sarsfield comes, will you tell him I have gone home?" I said;
and was turning away, when Anstey, with a nervous blush, said, in a
soft, deprecating voice--

“Oh, miss, I beg your pardon! I was very sorry to hear you got anny sort
of a fright from my mother last night. It's just a little restless she
is, those last few nights, and my father'd be greatly vexed if he
thought you got anny annoyance by her."

I assured her that my alarm had only been momentary, wondering vaguely
how she had heard anything about it.

“Indeed, miss, she'd hurt no one. She's this way, foolish-like, this
long time."

“How long is it since it began?" I said, with interest.

“I never remember her anny other way, miss, though my father says she
was once a fine, handsome girl, and as sensible as yourself, miss."

“Did her mind go from an accident?" I asked.

“Why, then, indeed, miss, I don't rightly know. She had some strange
turn in her always, and afther I was born she got quare altogether; and
that's the way she is ever since. Dumb, like she couldn't spake, and
silly in her mind."

I was looking in the direction of the lodge while she spoke, half
unconsciously noting how thickly the ivy trails hung over its small
windows, when I became aware of a face looking out at me through one of
them.

I could distinguish little of it beyond the wide-open, pale eyes, which
were fixed upon me with a concentrated, half-terrified intentness; but
with a momentary return of last night's unreasoning panic, I knew it to
be the face of the woman of whom we were speaking. Something of this
must have been shown in my expression, for Anstey, following the
direction of my eyes, said--

“Don't be frightened at all, miss. Sure that's only poor mother. Will I
bring her out here for your honour to see?"

But I had no wish for any close acquaintance, so hastily saying that, as
it was already dark, I had no time to stay, I wished Anstey good night.

I must confess that, as I walked away from the lodge, I was haunted by
the frightened glare of Moll Hourihane's eyes. There had been something
in their expression which, beneath the oblivion of insanity, seemed
almost to struggle into recognition. At the remembrance of them, I felt
the same unconquerable dread creep over me again, and I hurried along
the avenue towards home. To my imagination, the patches of grey lichen
on the trees repeated in the growing twilight the effect of the grey
face at the darkened window. The dead leaves awoke as I trod on them,
and followed me with whisperings and cracklings. It was a relief to
leave the little wood behind, and to see in the library windows the
flickering glow which told of a good fire, and suggested tea.

I was surprised and annoyed by the unwonted nervousness which had
lately affected me. I prided myself upon being a singularly practical,
unimaginative person; and yet now, for the third time since my arrival
at Durrus, my self-possession had been disturbed by a trivial event,
which I should formerly have laughed at. I walked rapidly to the house,
determined for the future to give no toleration to my foolish fancy, and
to----

“Here you are!" said Willy's voice from the hall door. “Come on and have
some tea."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IX.

“THE TURF, THE CHASE, AND THE ROAD."

    “Ford. Old woman! What old woman's that?

           *       *       *       *       *

     A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean!
     Have I not forbid her my house?"


It occurred to me several times during the next few days, how strangely
little I saw of my uncle. Except at luncheon and dinner, he seldom or
never appeared, even in the evenings preferring to sit alone over his
wine in the gloomy dining-room, while Willy and I were in the
drawing-room. At ten o'clock regularly the door would open, and his tall
austere figure would appear, holding my candle ready lighted; and with
the same little speech about the advantages of early hours for young
people, he would wish me good night, politely standing at the foot of
the stairs as I went up. As a rule, I did not see him again until
luncheon next day, and I wondered more and more how he spent his time.

Willy seemed to know little more about his father's occupations than I
did.

“Oh, I don't know what he's up to," he had said, when I asked him. “He
prowls about the place from goodness knows what awful hour in the
morning till breakfast, and he sits in that den of his all day, more or
less. I've plenty to do besides watching him."

Whether or not this was Willy's real reason for avoiding his father, it
was a sufficiently plausible one. All outdoor affairs at Durrus were
under his control, and at any time during the morning he might be seen
tramping in and out of the stable, or standing about the yard, giving
orders and talking to the numerous workmen in a brogue in no way
inferior to their own.

I may mention here that Willy, in common with most Irish gentlemen when
speaking to the lower orders, paid them the delicate, if unintentional,
compliment of temporarily adopting their accent and phraseology. I had
plenty of opportunities of noticing this, as Willy evidently considered
that the simplest method of providing for my amusement was to take me
about with him as much as possible. I had at first rather dreaded the
prospect of these constant tête-à-têtes, but I soon found that my
cousin had always plenty to talk about, and was one of the only men I
have ever met who was a good listener.

He contrived to include me in most of his comings and goings about the
place. He took me down to the cove to see the seaweed carried up the
rocks on donkeys' backs to be spread on the land; or I watched with deep
interest while the great turf-house was slowly packed for the winter
with the rough chocolate-coloured sods; or, standing at a little
distance, I listened with respect to his arbitration of a dispute
between two of the tenants, who generally accepted his verdict as if it
had been a pronouncement of the Delphic oracle. He was very popular with
the country people, as much perhaps from his invincible shrewdness as
from his ready good-nature, and subsequent observation has shown me that
nothing so much compels the respect and admiration of the Irish peasant
as the rare astuteness that can outwit him.

Thursday was fair day at Moycullen, and Willy, who regarded the
attending of fairs as both a duty and privilege, proceeded thither with
the first light of day. To say at cock-crow would scarcely be an
exaggeration, for, knowing well the absurdity of expecting any servant
within the walls of Durrus to call him, he had--so he informed
me--resorted to the extraordinary device of putting over-night a
vigorous barn-door cock on the top of his wardrobe. This bird's
relentless cries at dawn were, as may be imagined, of a sufficiently
rousing character, and in consequence Willy's arrival at even the most
distant fairs was as a rule timely.

The result of his absence was a solitary morning for me, and lunch alone
with Uncle Dominick. Although faintly alarmed at the latter prospect, I
was at the same time glad of the chance which it offered of getting to
know him a little better.

But in this I was disappointed. My uncle did not abate an atom of his
usual impenetrable civility, and conversed with me on entirely
uninteresting topics, with a fluency that was as admirable as it was
provoking. I was absolutely at a loss to understand him; and, being a
person sensitive to the opinions of others, I puzzled myself a great
deal as to what he thought about me. The compliments which he never lost
an opportunity of making, and his evident desire that Willy should do
all in his power to make my visit agreeable to me, were not, I felt
sure, any real indications of his feelings. That he took an interest in
me, I was certain. Often I surprised in his cold eyes a still scrutiny,
a watchful appraising glance that suggested mistrust, if not dislike;
and although his manner was distant and self-engrossed, I had a
conviction that little that I said or did escaped him.

It was a depressing day. A quiet rain trickled steadily down, and
through the blurred windows the trees looked naked and disconsolate
against the threatening sky. I made up my mind that it was not a day to
go out, and, with a pitying thought of Willy at the fair, I heaped turf
and logs upon the library fire, and determined to write a really long
letter to one of my friends in America.

After a period of virtuous endeavour with this intent, I discovered that
I was becoming bored to stupefaction, and gave up the struggle. There
was something in the air of Durrus antagonistic to letter-writing; or
perhaps it was the impossibility of writing about a place which was so
different from anything that I or my correspondents had been accustomed
to, and was at the same time so devoid of interest for them. I bethought
me of a certain old book of field-sports which Willy had commended to
my notice, and I wandered round the dusty shelves, looking for it among
the exceptionally uninteresting collection of books which formed my
uncle's library. Not being able to find it, I took the bold step of
going to his room to ask him if he could tell me where it was.

As I went down the long dark passage that led to his room, I was keenly
alive to the temerity of the proceeding, and knocked at the door with
some trepidation.

“What is it?" came an unencouraging voice from within.

“Oh! I only wanted to ask you about a book, Uncle Dominick," I began.

The door was opened almost immediately.

“Come in, my dear Theo," said my uncle, with what was intended for a
smile of welcome. “What book is it you want?"

I explained, adding that Willy had recommended the book to me.

“Oh, Willy told you of it, did he?" said my uncle, with interest; “and
you cannot find it in the library?"--turning towards a large cupboard
that filled a recess on one side of the chimney-piece. “Perhaps I have
it in here."

I heard a faint jingle of glass as he opened it; but the doors of fluted
green silk, latticed with brass wire, prevented, from where I was
standing, my seeing inside. My uncle ran his finger along one of the
shelves in search of the book I wanted. Meantime I looked curiously
about me.

It was a small, dingy room, disproportionately high for its size, with
county and estate maps hanging on its damp-stained walls. A handsome old
escritoire stood in the corner to the right of the lofty window that
faced the door by which I had entered. On one or two tables, dusty
pamphlets and papers lay about in a comfortless way. Right in front of
the fire was a battered leather-covered armchair, in which my uncle had
been sitting, though there was no book or newspaper to indicate that he
had been occupied in any way.

“It is an unusual thing to hear of Willy recommending a book. I suppose
this is due to your civilizing influence?" said my uncle, emerging from
the recesses of the cupboard with the book in question in his hand.

“Oh, well," I replied, laughing, “this is not a very high class of
literature."

“It is, nevertheless, a classic in its way," he said, opening the book;
“and the prints are very good indeed."

I came and stood beside him, looking at the illustrations with him.

“The Regulator on Hertford Bridge Flat," “The Race, Epsom," “The
Whissendine Brook"--we studied them together, Uncle Dominick becoming
unexpectedly interesting and friendly in his reminiscences of his own
sporting days when he was a young man at Oxford.

As he paused in looking at the pictures to enlarge upon an experience of
his own, the pages slipped from his stiff bony fingers, and, turning
over of their own accord, remained open at the title-page. There I saw,
in faded ink, the words, “Owen Sarsfield, the gift of his affectionate
Brother, D. S."

My uncle looked at the inscription for half an instant, and, drawing a
quick breath, closed the book.

“Uncle Dominick," I said, with a sudden impulse, “won't you tell me
something about my father? My mother could never bear to speak of him,
and I know so little about him."

He turned his back to me, and replaced the book in the cupboard, feeling
for its place in the shelves in a dull, mechanical way.

“I hate to give you pain," I went on; “but if you knew how much I have
thought about him since I have been here! I have always so connected him
and Durrus together in my mind."

He walked back to the fireplace, and placed one hand on the narrow
marble shelf before answering.

“There are many circumstances connected with your father which make it
painful for me to speak of him," he began, in a very quiet, measured
voice. “I loved him very dearly; we were always together until his
lamentable quarrel with my father."

He walked to the window, and stood looking out through the streaming
panes, with his hands behind his back. After a few moments of waiting
for him to speak again, I could bear the silence no longer.

“But what was the quarrel about? Was it my father's fault?"

“It is a hard thing to say to you," replied my uncle, turning round and
looking past me into the fire, “but, under the circumstances, I feel
that it is my duty to let you know the truth. Your father unfortunately
got into money difficulties while at Oxford, which he was afraid to
mention to his father. He went to London to study for the Bar with these
debts still hanging over him, while I came home and undertook the
management of the property." He paused, and passed a large silk
handkerchief over his face. “Owen always had a passion for the stage; he
got entangled with a theatrical set in London, and finally he took the
fatal step of making himself responsible for the expenses of an--in
fact, of a travelling company of actors, with, I need hardly tell you,
what result. Instead of the enterprise paying his debts, as he had
hoped, he found himself liable for large sums of money."

Uncle Dominick came back to the fireplace, where I was standing
nervously grasping the shabby back of the leather armchair. I suppose my
face told of the anxious conjectures that filled my mind, for, looking
at me not unkindly, my uncle went on.

“I did all I could for him with my father, but he was a man of very
violent temper, and was absolutely infuriated with Owen. He paid the
debts, but he refused to see Owen again, and insisted on his leaving the
country. I contrived to see him before he left England, and from that
day until I got his letter saying he was ill in Cork, I neither heard of
nor from him."

“But," I broke in, “why did he never write to you?"

My uncle hesitated, and drew his hand heavily over his moustache. I saw
that it trembled. He sat down in the chair by which I stood, and did not
answer. I put my hand on his shoulder.

“Surely he had not quarrelled with you, Uncle Dominick? Or was it that
you--that you thought he had behaved too----" I could not finish the
sentence.

“No, no, my dear," he said quickly; “I had no such feelings. I would
have done anything in the world for him at that time." He cleared his
throat and continued huskily, “It was Owen who misjudged me, who
misconstrued all my efforts on his behalf, who ignored my offers of
assistance. I cannot bear to think of what I went through," he ended
hastily, leaving his chair and again walking to the window. It was a
French window, and a few stone steps led from it to the grass outside.
He opened one door and looked down the drive.

It was getting darker, and the rain came driving in from the sea in
ghost-like white clouds, as he stood there motionless, and apparently
oblivious of the drops that fell from the roof on his head and
shoulders.

“Are you looking out for Willy?" I said at length.

“Oh, Willy! Yes; is he not home yet?" he answered absently, closing the
window.

“Is there any portrait of my father in the house?" I asked as he turned
towards me, ignoring his remark about Willy in my anxiety to put a
question that since my arrival at Durrus I had often wished to ask, and
feeling that it might not be easy to find another opportunity of
reopening the subject.

“There is one, taken when he was a child; it hangs in the corridor
outside your bedroom door."

“But I think there are two portraits of boys there," I persisted. “I am
afraid I should not know which was his."

My uncle rose wearily from his seat. “If you wish, I will show it to you
now," he said. “If you will go upstairs, I will follow you in an
instant."

I went slowly up the passage, and before I had reached the foot of the
stairs he overtook me, and we went up together. He had his crimson silk
handkerchief in his hand, and I remember wondering why he kept pressing
it to his mouth as we walked along the corridor side by side.

A faint light shone through the open door of the room over the hall
door, the one that opened into mine, and against the grey light I saw in
the window a crouching figure indistinctly silhouetted.

My uncle saw it too. With a muttered exclamation of anger, he walked
quickly past me to the open doorway.

“What are you doing here?" he said sternly. “You know I desired you not
to come upstairs, and this is the second time this week I have found you
here."

He stepped back to one side, and a tall woman with a shawl covering her
bent shoulders shuffled out of the room. I had already guessed that it
was Moll Hourihane, and I shrank back into the doorway of my own room;
but she stopped, and, stretching out her neck towards me, she fixed her
eyes upon my face with an expression of hungry eagerness.

“Did you hear what I ordered you? Go down at once," repeated my uncle,
placing himself between her and me. “Let me never find you here again."

She immediately turned and slunk away round the far side of the
corridor, and, looking back once more at me, disappeared through the
door that led to the servants' quarters.

I gave a sigh of relief. “That woman terrifies me," I said. “I wish she
would not look at me in that dreadful way."

“You need not be alarmed"--he spoke breathlessly and with unusual
excitement--“she is perfectly harmless; but I do not choose to have her
roaming about the house. These are the pictures of which we were
speaking," he continued. “The one to the right was done of me, and
this--this is the other"--pointing to an old-fashioned looking portrait
of a pretty dark-haired boy holding a spaniel in his arms.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER X.

THE MOYCULLEN HOUNDS.

    “On the first day of spring, in the year '93,
     The first recreation in this countheree,
     The King's counthry gintlemen o'er hills, dales, and rocks,
     They rode out so gallant in search of a fox."


Blackthorn looked sedately amiable as Tom led him up to the hall door
next morning, and I felt as I looked at him that I might safely trust
him to initiate me into the mysteries of cross-country riding in the
county Cork.

The day was lovely--sunny and mild, with a lingering dampness in the air
that told of light rain during the night. I settled myself in the
saddle, intoxicated by the idea that I was actually going out hunting
for the first time, though I could not help a tremor of anxiety as I
wondered if Willy would find his confidence in me had been misplaced.

I could hear him now in the hall, knocking down umbrellas and sticks in
search of his whip, and presently, in response to his shouts, old Roche
came shuffling to his aid.

“I was putting up your sandwiches, sir," he said.

“Go on, and give hers to Miss Theo, and hurry," said Willy's voice, in a
tone indicative of exasperation.

Roche bustled out on to the steps with a small packet in his hand, a
jovial smile on his face. He looked at me, and his face changed.

“My God! 'tis Master Owen himself!" he said, as if involuntarily. “I beg
your pardon, miss," he continued, coming down the steps and putting the
sandwiches into the saddle-pocket. “I suppose 'twas the man's hat, and
the sight of you up on the horse, made me think of the young master, as
we called your father."

Willy, at all times a carefully attired person, was to-day absolutely
resplendent in his red coat and buckskins, and as we rode slowly down
the avenue, I was impelled to tell him how smart both he and the mare
looked. He beamed upon me with a simple satisfaction.

“Do you think so? Well, now, do you know what I was thinking? That no
matter how good-looking a girl is, she always looks fifty per cent.
better on a horse."

“That is a most ingenious way of praising your own horse," I said.

“Ah now, you know what I mean quite well," rejoined Willy, with a look
which was intended to be sentimental, but, by reason of his
irrepressibly good spirits, rather fell away into a grin.

The meet was to be at the Clashmore cross-roads, and we passed many
people on their way there. White-flannel-coated country boys and young
men--“going for the best places to head the fox," as Willy observed with
bitterness, and little chattering swarms of national-school children.
Every now and then a young farmer or two came clattering along, on
rough, short-necked horses, whose heavy tails swung from side to side as
they trotted at full speed past us, and an occasional red coat gave a
reality to the fact that I was going out fox-hunting. The cross-roads
were now in sight, and I saw a number of riders and people who had
driven to see the meet, waiting for the hounds to come up.

“Why, I declare, here are the two Miss Burkes coming along in that old
shandrydan of theirs with the bedridden grey pony!" said Willy, looking
back. “Hold on, Theo. I must introduce you to them; they're great
specimens."

We allowed the pony-carriage to overtake us, and Willy, pulling off his
hat with as fine a flourish as his gold hatguard would allow, asked
leave to introduce me.

“With the greatest of pleasure, Willy. Indeed, we'd no idea till
yesterday, when we met Doctor Kelly in town, that Miss Sorsefield had
arrived." This from the elder Miss Burke, a large, gaunt lady with a
good-humoured red face and an enormous Roman nose, and a curiously deep
voice, whose varying inflections ran up and down the vocal scale in
booming cadences.

“You ought to be riding the pony, Miss Burke. She looks in great form."

“Oh, now, Willy! you're always joking me about poor old Zoé. You're very
naughty about him. Isn't he, Bessy?"

The younger Miss Burke, thus appealed to, replied with a genteel simper,
“Reely, Mimi, I'm quite ashamed of the way you and the captain go on.
Don't ask me to interfere with your nonsense. We hope, Miss
Sarsfield"--turning a face that was a pale dull replica of her sister's
towards me--“to have the pleasure of calling upon you very soon. But oh,
my gracious! there are the dogs and Mr. Dennehy coming! And look at us
keeping you delaying here! Good-bye, Miss Sarsfield. I hope you'll
obtain a fox."

At the cross-roads we found the master of the Moycullen hunt, a big,
wild-looking man with a long reddish-grey beard and moustache, seated
on an ugly yellow horse with a black stripe, like a donkey's, down his
back.

“How do you do, Mr. Dennehy?" said Willy, as we rode up. “Nice day. This
is my cousin, Miss Sarsfield. I hope you'll show her some sport.
Morning, Nugent. How are you, Miss Connie? Do you see the new mount I
have?" and Willy forgot his duties as my chaperon, in a lively
conversation with Miss O'Neill.

Mr. Dennehy, with what was, I believe, unwonted condescension, began to
speak to me.

“I'm delighted to see you out, Miss Sarsfield," he said in a slow,
solemn brogue. “I hope we'll have a good day for you, and if there's a
fox in Clashmore at all, these little hounds of mine will have him out."

I did not know much about hounds, but even to inexperienced eyes these
appeared to be a very motley collection. Mr. Dennehy saw me look with
interest at two strange little animals, somewhat resembling long-legged
black-and-tan terriers.

“Well, Miss Sarsfield, those are the two best hounds I have, though
they're ugly creatures enough. And there's a good hound. Loo, Solomon,
good hound! That's a hound will only spake to game."

Here Mr. Dennehy produced a battered little horn, and with two or three
bleats upon it to collect his hounds, he put the yellow horse at a
yawning black ditch that divided the road from a narrow strip of rough
ground, perpendicularly from which rose a steep hill covered with
laurels. The yellow horse took the ditch and the low stone wall on its
farther side with unassuming skill, and he and Mr. Dennehy were
presently lost to sight in the wood.

Willy now came up to me with Miss O'Neill and her brother, and I was
introduced to the former, a small, fair-haired girl in a smart habit,
with brown eyes and rather a high colour. She nodded to me with cheery
indifference, and continued her conversation with Willy, leaving me to
talk to her brother.

This I found to be a somewhat difficult task. His manner was exceedingly
polite, but he appeared to be engrossed in watching the covert, and we
finally relapsed into silence. At intervals Mr. Dennehy's red coat
showed between the low close-growing trees as he led his horse through
the covert, and we could hear his original method of encouraging his
hounds.

“Thatsy me darlins! Thatsy-atsy-atsy! Turrn him out, Woodbine! Hi,
Waurior, good hound!"

I felt inclined to laugh, but as no one else seemed amused, I refrained
and waited for further developments. Presently, with a few words to
Willy, Mr. O'Neill put spurs to his big bay and galloped off. In a
moment or two, Miss O'Neill, without further ceremony, followed her
brother to the other end of the covert, and Willy and I remained with
about twenty other riders on the road.

“See here!" he said in low, excited tones. “You keep close to me. Old
Dennehy's got a beastly trick of slipping away with his hounds directly
they find, and making fools of the whole field, leaving them the wrong
side of the covert. But I think we're in a good place here. Whisht!
wasn't that a hound speaking? Come on this way."

We set off down the road helter-skelter after Mr. O'Neill and Connie,
but were stopped by an excited rush of country boys with shouts of,
“He's gone aisht! He's broke the far side!" and at the same instant Mr.
and Miss O'Neill came pounding down a ride out of the covert.

“It's just as I thought; Dennehy's gone away with the hounds by
himself," called out Mr. O'Neill. “A country fellow saw the fox heading
for Lick, and Dennehy all alone with the hounds, going like mad!"

At this juncture I think it better not to record Willy's remarks.

“It's all right, Nugent," said Connie. “I know a way over the hill lower
down."

“Don't mind her, Theo," said Willy in my ear; “just you stick to me."

We had galloped past the eastern bound of the wood, and as he spoke he
turned his horse and jumped the fence on the right of the road.
Blackthorn followed of his own accord, and I found that an Irish bank
did not feel as difficult as it looked.

Willy turned in his saddle to watch me.

“Well done! that's your sort," he shouted. “Hold him now, and hit him!
This is a big place we're coming to."

We were over before I had time to think, and to my horror I saw that
Willy was making for a hill that looked like the side of a house,
covered with furze.

“There's a way up here, but you'll have to lead. Nip off! I'll go
first."

I was fearfully out of breath, but Willy allowed no time for delay. Up
the hill we scrambled, Blackthorn leading me considerably more than I
led him. After the first few seconds of climbing, I felt as if it would
be impossible to go on. My habit hindered me at every step. Blackthorn's
jerks and tugs at the reins nearly threw me on my face, and the fear of
Willy alone prevented me from letting him finish the ascent by himself.
When at last we reached the top, Willy and I were both so much out of
breath that we could not speak, and I wished for nothing so much as to
lie down. But Willy, with a blazing face, made signs to me to mount at
once, and, jerking me into the saddle, we again set off.

The top of the hill which we had now gained was rough, boggy ground.
Down to our right lay the gleaming laurel covert, and in front of us the
hill sloped gradually down into a low tract of bog and lakes, with hills
beyond. We could see nothing of any one, but a countryman, on the top of
a bank above the wood, waved semaphore-like directions that the hounds
were running to the north-east.

“Hullo! here's Nugent," said Willy, in a not over-pleased voice, and as
he spoke I saw Mr. O'Neill's bay horse coming along over the hill. He
soon overtook us, looking, I was glad to see, as heated and dishevelled
as Willy and I.

“I knew that way of Connie's was no use, so I came back and went up the
hill after you. Where are the hounds?"

“Going north-east, a fellow told me. But look! By Jove! there they are
on the hill across the bog, and going straight for Killnavoodhee."

“There is only one way to pick them up," said Nugent, with what seemed
to me unnatural calm--“we must cross the bog."

“But, my dear fellow, I don't believe there's a way across, and once we
got in, we'd not get out in a hurry."

“Do you mind trying, Miss Sarsfield?" demanded Mr. O'Neill.

“Whatever Willy likes," I said.

“Oh, all right," said Willy. “Fire away, but you'll have to pay for the
funeral, Nugent."

We had now reached the foot of the hill, and we rode rapidly along the
verge of the bog for a short distance till we came to where an old
fence traversed it in a north-easterly direction.

“Here's the place. If we can get along the top of this, we shall just
hit off their line," Mr. O'Neill said. He went first, and the horses
picked their way along the top of the bank like cats, though the sides
crumbled under their feet, and sometimes the whole structure tottered as
if it were going to collapse into the deep dykes on either side. At last
it broke sharp off, at a pool of black mire. Our guide dismounted and
jumped down into the bog, pulling his horse after him, and we slowly
dragged our way through the heavy ground to the farther side of the bog.

Here we were confronted by the most formidable obstacle we had yet come
to. It consisted of a low, soft-looking bank, with an immense boggy
ditch beyond it.

“We've got to try it, I suppose," said Willy, “but it's a thundering big
jump, and there's a deuced bad landing beyond the water."

He and Mr. O'Neill remounted, and the former put his horse at the place.
The bay's hoofs sank deep in the bank, but he took a spring that landed
him safely on the opposite side on comparatively firm ground. My turn
came next.

“Whip him over it!" exclaimed Willy.

I did so as well as I was able, but the treacherous ground broke under
Blackthorn's feet, and he all but floundered back into the ditch as he
landed.

“Oh, Willy!" I cried, “I'm afraid you'll never get her over now that the
bank is broken."

But Willy was already too much occupied with Alaska to make any reply.
She refused several times, but finally, yielding to the inevitable, she
threw herself rather than jumped off the bank, and the next moment she
and Willy were in the ditch.

I was terrified as to the consequences, and was much relieved when I saw
Willy, black from head to foot, crawl from the mare's back on to the
more solid mud of the bank on our side. Without a word he caught Alaska
by the head, and began to try and pull her out. His extraordinary
appearance, and the fact that he was much too angry to be in the least
conscious of its absurdity, had the disastrous effect of reducing both
Mr. O'Neill and me to helpless laughter.

“I am very sorry, Willy," I panted, “and I am delighted you're not hurt;
but if you could only see yourself!"

Willy silently continued his efforts.

“Oh, Mr. O'Neill, do get down and help him," I continued.

“I don't want any help, thank you," returned my cousin, with restrained
fury. “Come up out of that, you brute!"--applying his hunting-crop with
vigour to the recumbent Alaska, who thereupon, with two or three violent
efforts, heaved herself out of the slough. All this time Mr. O'Neill had
been grinning with that unfeigned delight which all hunting-men seem to
derive from the misfortunes of their friends.

“You have toned down that new coat, Willy," he remarked; “and I must say
the little mare takes to water like an otter."

“Oh, I dare say it's very funny indeed!" retorted Willy, leading Alaska
on to the higher ground where we were standing; “but if you'd an eye in
your head you'd see the mare is dead lame."

“By George! so she is. That's hard luck. She must have given herself a
strain."

“Well, whatever ails her, there's no use in your standing there looking
at me," replied Willy. “I can get home all right. I don't want Theo to
lose the run, and you'll head them yet if you put on the pace."

His magnanimity was almost more crushing than his wrath. I was filled
with contrition for my heartless amusement, and begged to be allowed to
stay with him. But I was given no voice in the matter; my offer was
scouted, and before I had fairly grasped the situation, I was galloping
up a narrow mountain road after Nugent O'Neill.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XI

NUGENT O'NEILL.

    “He is the toniest aristocrat on the boat."


After we had gone about a quarter of a mile, my companion pulled up.

“I think our best chance is to wait here," he said, “From the way the
hounds were running, they are almost certain to come this way
eventually."

The road up which we had ridden formed the only pass between the hills
on either side of us, and beyond was a low-lying level stretch of
country.

“If he'll only run down that way----" Mr. O'Neill began, but suddenly
stopped, and silently pointed with his whip to the hill at our right.

“What is it?" I asked, in incautiously loud tones.

He looked for an instant as if he were going to shake his whip at me,
and again pointed, this time to a narrow strip of field beside the road.
I saw what looked like a little brown shadow fleeting across it, and in
another moment the fox appeared on the top of the wall a few yards ahead
of us. He looked about him as if considering his next move, and then,
seeing us, he leaped into the road and, running along it, vanished over
the crest of the hill.

Mr. O'Neill turned to me with such excitement that he seemed a different
person. “Here are the hounds!" he said, “and not a soul with them."

Down the hill the pack came like a torrent, and were over the wall in a
second. They spread themselves over the road in front of us as if at
fault; but one of the little black-and-tan hounds justified Mr.
Dennehy's good opinion by picking up the line, and at once the whole
pack were racing full cry up the road.

I have often looked back with considerable amusement to that moment. I
was suddenly possessed by a kind of frenzy of excitement that deprived
me of all power of speech. I heard my companion tell me to keep as close
to him as I could, but I was incapable of any response save an
inebriated smile and a wholly absurd flourish of my whip.

As this does not purport to be a hunting-story, I will not describe the
run which followed. I believe it lasted fifteen minutes, and included
some of the traditional “big leps" of the country. But to me it was
merely an indefinite period of delirious happiness. I scarcely felt
Blackthorn jump, and was only conscious of the thud of the big bay
horse's hoofs in front of me and the rushing of the wind in my ears, At
last a wood seemed to heave up before me; the bay horse was pulled up
sharply, and I found myself almost in the middle of the hounds.

“By George! he's just saved his brush," said Mr. O'Neill, breathlessly;
“he's gone to ground in there, and I am afraid we shall never get him
out. I hope you are none the worse for your gallop," he continued
politely. “It was pretty fast while it lasted." He dismounted as he
spoke, and began to investigate the hole in which the fox had taken
refuge, and while he was thus engaged I saw Mr. Dennehy on his yellow
horse coming across the next field. When he came up he was, rather to
my surprise, amiably pleased at our success in picking up the hounds,
and regretted we had not killed our fox.

“You two and meself were the only ones in this run," he said.

My thoughts at once reverted to poor Willy. I asked Mr. Dennehy if he
had seen anything of him, and heard that he had passed my cousin, slowly
making his way home.

“Oh, I think I ought to go home at once," I said to Mr. O'Neill. “I
might overtake him if you will tell me where I am to go."

“If you will allow me, I think you had better let me show you the way,"
he answered, with a resumption of the stiff manner which had at first
struck me. Although I was quite aware that politeness alone prompted
this offer, my ignorance of the country made it impossible for me to
refuse it. Trusting, however, that by speedily overtaking Willy I should
be able to release my unwilling pilot, I wished Mr. Dennehy good
morning, and we made the best of our way to the nearest road.

Our way lay through what seemed to me a chessboard of absurdly small
fields. I could not imagine where all the stones came from that were
squandered in the heaping up of the walls that divided them from each
other, nor did I greatly care, so long as the necessity of jumping them
gave me something to amuse me, and made conversation with Mr. O'Neill
disjointed and unexacting.

What little I had seen of him at the covert-side had not inspired me
with any anxiety to pursue his acquaintance, and once we had got out on
to the road, with all the responsibilities of a tête-à-tête staring us
in the face, my heart died within me. Never had I met any one who was
so difficult to talk to. I found that I was gradually assuming the
ungrateful position of a catechist, and, while filled with smothered
indignation at my companion's perfunctory answers, I could not repress a
certain admiration for the composure with which he allowed the whole
stress of discourse to rest upon my shoulders. I at length made up my
mind to give myself no more trouble in the cause of politeness, and
resolved that until he chose to speak I would not do so.

A long silence was the result. We rode on side by side, my companion
staring steadily between his horse's ears, while I wondered how soon we
should be likely to meet Willy, and thought how very much more I should
have preferred his society.

“I suppose you find this place rather dull?" Mr. O'Neill's uninterested
voice at last broke the silence. “I have always heard that American
young ladies had a very gay time."

I at once felt that this insufferable young man was trying to talk down
to my level--the level of an “American young lady"--and my smouldering
resentment got the better of my politeness.

“I very seldom find myself bored by places. It is, as a rule, the people
of the place that bore me."

“Really," he returned, with perfect serenity. “Yes, I dare say that is
true; but ladies do not generally get on very well without shop and
dances."

“Strange as it may appear, neither of those entrancing occupations are
essential to my happiness."

Mr. O'Neill turned and looked at me with faint surprise, but made no
reply. Another pause ensued, and I began to repent of my crossness.

It was clearly my turn to make the next remark, and I said, in a more
conciliatory voice--

“I suppose you don't have very much to do here, either?"

“Oh, I am not here very much, and I can always get as much shooting and
fishing as I want; but I fancy my sisters find it rather dull."

“Are your sisters fond of music? I was very glad to find a piano at
Durrus."

His face assumed for the first time a look of interest.

“My elder sister plays a good deal; and Connie has a banjo, though I
cannot say she knows much about it; and I play the fiddle a little. I
believe in these parts we are considered quite a gifted family."

I felt that I had, so to speak, “struck ile."

“Do you play the violin?" I said, with excitement. “I delight in playing
accompaniments! I hope you will bring your music with you when you come
to dinner."

“Oh, thanks very much; my sister always accompanies me," he responded
coolly.

His deliberate self-possession was infinitely exasperating in my then
state of mind, and I repented the enthusiasm that had laid me open to
this snub. I was hurriedly framing an effective rejoinder, when he again
spoke, this time in tones of considerable amusement.

“Do you see that man leading a lame horse down the road? If he is not a
chimney-sweep, I think he must be your cousin."

As we came nearer, I was secretly unspeakably tickled by Willy's inky
and bedraggled appearance; but I was too proud to join in Mr. O'Neill's
open amusement, until I noticed for the first time the incongruously
rakish effect imparted to Willy's forlorn figure by the fact that his
hat had been crushed in. My injured dignity collapsed, and, holding on
to my saddle for support, I laughed till the tears poured down my
cheeks.

It was at this singularly unpropitious moment that Willy, hearing our
horses' feet, turned round.

“Oh, there you are!" he called out. “Did you meet the hounds?" Then, in
a voice which showed his good temper had not returned. “You seem to be
greatly amused, whatever you did."

I thought it better to ignore the latter part of the sentence, and
dashed at once into a confused account of our exploits, Mr. O'Neill
helping out my narrative with a few geographical details; to all of
which Willy listened with morose attention.

“And Blackthorn jumped splendidly, Willy," I said. “I was so sorry you
weren't there."

“H'm!" said Willy; “very kind of you, I'm sure."

Mr. O'Neill saw that the situation was becoming strained.

“As I can't be of any further help to you or Miss Sarsfield," he said,
“I think I will go back and look for the hounds;" and, wishing us
good-bye, he rode off.

“Well," Willy began viciously, “you seem to find O'Neill cheerful
enough, after all."

“Indeed, I don't, Willy," I said, with vigour; “he was perfectly
odious."

“You didn't look as if you thought him so a while ago, when you were
both near falling off your horses with laughing. I suppose"--with
sudden penetration--“that it was at me you were laughing."

“Oh no, Willy; at least, it was not exactly you--indeed, it was only
your hat."

Even at this supreme moment the air of disreputable gaiety of Willy's
headgear was too much for me, and my voice broke into a hysterical
shriek. This was the last straw. With a wrathful glance, he turned his
back upon me, and stalked silently on beside Alaska. Blackthorn and I
followed meekly in the rear, and in this order we soberly proceeded to
Durrus.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XII.

A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY.

    “And wouldst thou leave me thus? Say Nay."


A lowering grey sky succeeded the sunshine of the day of the hunt. I
crawled down late to breakfast, feeling very stiff after yesterday's
exertions, and was on the whole relieved to find that Willy had gone out
for a long day's shooting, and that till lunch at least I should have no
one to entertain but myself.

The evening before had been, as far as Willy had been concerned, of a
rather complicated type. I had done all in my power to efface from his
mind the memory of my unfortunate laughter, but until dinner was over he
had remained implacable. Uncle Dominick, on the contrary, had been
unusually bland and talkative. It appeared that Madam O'Neill and her
eldest daughter had called on me while I was out, and my uncle, having
met them on the drive, had brought them in, given them tea, and had even
gone so far as to ask the two girls to come with their brother to dinner
the next night. He had given me to understand that this unusual
hospitality was on my account--“Although," he added, “I have no doubt
you two young people are quite well able to amuse each other." The look
which accompanied this was, under the circumstances, so peculiarly
embarrassing, that, in order to change the conversation, I made the
mistake of beginning to describe the hunt. Too soon I discovered that
to slur over Willy's disaster would be impossible, and my obvious
efforts to do so did not improve matters.

“So you went off with young O'Neill," my uncle had said, with a change
of look and voice that frightened me; and nothing more was said on the
subject.

My discomfiture was perhaps the cause of the alteration in Willy's
demeanour after dinner. Success far beyond my expectations, or indeed my
wishes, was the result of my conciliatory advances. I went to bed
feeling that I had more than regained the position I had held in Willy's
esteem, and a little flurried by the difficulties of so ambiguous a
relationship as that of first cousins.

From all this, it may be imagined that when I heard from Roche that “the
masther was gone to town, and would not be home for lunch," I regarded
the combined absences of Willy and his father as little short of
providential.

I observed that the magenta and yellow dahlias which had decorated the
table on my arrival still held their ground, albeit in an advanced stage
of decay; and, remembering the glories of the autumn leaves, I suggested
to Roche that with his permission I might be able to improve upon the
present arrangement.

A little elated by the expectation of surprising Willy with the unusual
splendour of the dinner-table, and not without an emulative thought of
the O'Neills, I determined to ransack the shrubberies for the most
glowing leaves wherewith to carry out my purpose. A few minutes later, I
left the house with a capacious basket in my hand, feeling a delightful
sense of freedom, and full of the selfish, half-savage pleasure of a
solitary and irresponsible voyage of discovery.

I wandered down the nearest path to the sea, and, keeping to the shore,
came to the little promontory which, with its few ragged trees, I could
see from the windows of my room. There was a certain romance about this
lonely wind and wave beaten point that had always attracted me to it.
When, in the early light, I saw the fir trees' weird reflection in the
quiet cove, I used to wonder if they had ever been a landmark for some
western Dick Hatteraick; and now, as I scrambled about, and tugged at
the tough bramble-stems that trailed in the coarse grass, I was half
persuaded that any one of the rough boulders might close the entrance of
a smuggler's long-forgotten “hide."

I had soon gathered as many blackberry-leaves as I wanted, and, sitting
down beside one of the old trees, I leaned my cheek against its seamy
trunk and looked across the grey rollers to the horizon.

A narrow black line stole from behind the eastern point of Durrusmore
Harbour, leaving a dark stain on the sky as it went, and from where I
sat I fancied I could hear the beat of machinery.

It was the first time I had noticed the passing of one of the big
American steamers, and I watched the great creature move out of sight
with a strange conflict of feeling. Uppermost, I think, was the thought
of what my regret would be if I were at that moment on board her, bound
for America. I was a little ashamed when I reflected how soon the newer
interests had superseded the old. I had been but a week in Ireland, and
already the idea of leaving it for America was akin to that of
emigration. What, I wondered, was the charm that had worked so quickly?
Was this subtle familiarity and satisfaction with my new life merely the
result of æsthetic interest, or had it the depth of an inherited
instinct?

I could not tell; I could only feel a strange presentiment that my
existence had hitherto been nothing but a preface, and that I was now on
the threshold of what was to be, for good or evil, my real life.

I picked up my basket and retraced my steps down the little slope, till
I again found myself in the shrubbery walk. On one point my mind was
clear. My liking for Durrus was in no perceptible degree influenced by
my feeling for my uncle and my cousin. I reiterated this to myself as I
strolled along in the damp shade of over-arching laurels towards the
plantation which lay between the sea and the lodge.

Uncle Dominick was anything but a person to inspire immediate
affection; and then Willy--well, Willy certainly had many attractive
points, but, although he was a pleasant companion, he could not be said
to be either very cultured or refined.

I left the path and strayed through the wood, stopping here and there to
rob the branches of their lavish autumn loveliness. A sluggish little
stream crept among the trees, and along its banks the ferns grew
thickly. I knelt down in the stubbly yellow grass beside it, where the
pale trunk of a beech tree stooped over the water, and picked the small
delicate ferns that were clustering between its roots. Having gathered
all within reach, I still knelt there, watching a little procession of
withered beech-leaves making their slow way down the stream, and
studying my own dark reflection on the water.

I was at length startled by the sound of voices that seemed to come
from the path I had just left, but from where I was, the thickness of
the intervening laurels prevented me from seeing to whom they belonged.

It soon became evident that one of the speakers was a country girl. She
was talking rapidly and earnestly; but what she said was unintelligible
to me till she and her companion came to the point in the path which was
nearest to me, when, after a momentary pause, the soft voice broke out--

“Ye won't lave me for her, will ye, now? Ye said ye'd hold by me
always, and now----"

Something between a sob and a choke ended the sentence. Several sobs
followed; and then the girl's voice went on excitedly--

“Ah! 'tis no use your goin' on like that; ye know ye want to have done
with me entirely."

I could hear no reply; but that reassurance and consolation were offered
was obvious, for as the footsteps died away I heard something like a
broken laugh from the girl, with some faint echo of it from a man's
voice.

“Who can she be?" I thought, with instinctive compassion. There was a
certain perplexing familiarity in the low pathetic voice, and I walked
home, feeling unnecessarily depressed and troubled by what I had heard,
and wondering sadly at the self-abandonment which had led to such an
appeal.

The path by which I returned skirted the garden and formed a loop with
the one by which I had first entered the wood. As I approached the
broader walk, I saw a girl's figure flit down the other path, and I had
just time to recognize it as being that of Anstey Brian. Simultaneously
came the recollection of the pleading voice in the wood, and in an
instant I knew why it had been familiar.

“Then it must have been Anstey," I thought, feeling both sorry and
surprised. The entreaty in her voice had made it very plain how serious
a matter her trouble was to her, and the helplessness of her quick
surrender showed that she had lost all power of resistance or
resentment. I was astonished to think that so pretty a girl as Anstey
should have cause to reproach her sweetheart with want of constancy.
“Who could he be?" I wondered. Then, remembering that the path she was
on was a usual short cut from the lodge to the yard, I came to the
conclusion that one of the Durrus stablemen must have been the object of
this broken-hearted appeal. I determined that I would try and find out
something further about Anstey and her lover, and wondered if it would
be of any use to mention the subject to Willy.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XIII.

A DINNER-PARTY.

    “Go, let him have a table by himself!
     For he does neither affect company,
     Nor is he fit for't, indeed."


In spite of the incontestable success of my decorations, which drew
forth the admiration of even the superior Henrietta O'Neill, I felt,
before we had arrived at the period of fish, that the dinner-party was
likely to be a failure.

Uncle Dominick had, of course, taken in the elder Miss O'Neill, and as
far as they were concerned nothing was left to be desired. Conversation
of a fluent and high-class order was evidently her strong point. She at
once entered upon a discussion of Irish politics with my uncle in a
manner deserving of all praise, and as I surreptitiously studied her
pale, plain, intellectual face, with the dark hair severely drawn back,
and heard her enunciate her opinions in clearly framed sentences, I
became deeply conscious of my own general inferiority.

Nevertheless, I did what in me lay to talk to Nugent O'Neill, who had
taken me in, thus leaving to Willy the necessary and, as I thought,
congenial task of entertaining Miss Connie. Nothing could apparently be
better arranged. Nugent had exchanged his frigid, uninterested civility
of the day before for an excellent semblance of sociability, beneath
which, as it seemed to me, he concealed a curious observation of all
that I said. He had a dark clever face, with strong well-cut features,
and blue eyes, with a pleasanter expression in them than I had at first
expected to see there. His voice would have been monotonous in its
quietness and unexcitability had it not been for a certain humorous,
semi-American turn which he occasionally imparted to his sentences. He
annoyed me, but at the same time he was interesting; moreover--which was
to me a very strong point in his favour--he was evidently as much alive
as I to the fact that for the next hour and a half it would be our
solemn duty to amuse each other, and to that intent we both performed
prodigies of agreeability.

But Willy was the cause of disaster. I became gradually aware that
silence was settling down upon him and Connie, and that, instead of
devoting himself to her, he, with his eyes fixed on me and my partner,
was listening moodily to what we were saying. When this had gone on for
some minutes, during which Connie crumbled her bread and looked cross, I
was exasperated to the point of bestowing a glance upon him calculated
to awaken in him a sense of his bad manners. Far, however, from
accepting my reproof, Willy returned my look with a gaze of admiring
defiance, and projected himself into our conversation by flatly
contradicting what Nugent was saying. The latter rose many degrees in my
estimation by ignoring the interruption till he had reached the end of
his sentence. Then, with a tolerating smile, he looked past me to Willy,
and asked him what he had said.

Willy's dark eyebrows met in a way that unpleasantly reminded me of his
father.

“If it wasn't worth listening to, it's not worth repeating," he said
aggressively.

Terrified by the turn things were taking, I struck in quickly, “Oh,
Willy! have you told Miss O'Neill what you heard to-day about the
Jackson-Crolys giving a ball?"

“No; I thought she'd have heard it herself," he returned ungraciously.

“As it happens, I had heard nothing about it," said Connie, from the
other side of the table; “but I cannot say that I feel much excited at
the prospect of one of their dances."

“I am looking forward to it immensely," I said, persevering with my
topic. “I want very much to see a real Irish ball."

“Yes," said Nugent, reflectively; “you will see that to great perfection
at the Jackson-Crolys'. They excel in old Irish hospitality. They do
that kind of thing in quite the traditional way. Little Croly offers you
whiskey the moment you get into the hall; and, though you may not
believe it, Mrs. Jackson-Croly orders champagne to be put into all the
carriages when people are coming away. The guests are generally pretty
happy by that time, and she says it is to keep their hearts up on the
way home."

“That's quite true," observed Connie; “and, as well as I remember, you
were not at all above drinking it next day."

“Do they dance jigs at these entertainments?" I asked. “If so, I am
afraid I shall be rather out of it."

“Oh yes," said Willy, with what was intended to be biting sarcasm; “and
horn-pipes and Highland flings. They always do at Irish dances."

“Nonsense, Willy! They don't really, do they, Mr. O'Neill?"

“It is always well to be prepared for emergencies," he answered, “so I
should advise you to have some lessons from Willy. I have been told
that step-dancing is his strongest suit."

“Who told you that?" demanded Willy.

“One of our men was at McCarthy's wedding the other day, and said he saw
you there."

“Oh yes," supplemented Connie. “He said, 'The sight would lave your eyes
to see Mr. Sarsfield and that little gerr'l of owld Michael Brian's
taking the flure, and they so souple and so springy.'"

Willy did not appear to be at all amused by this flattering opinion, or
by the admirable accent in which it was repeated. On the contrary, he
looked rather disconcerted, and, with a glance towards the other end of
the table, he said awkwardly--

“Oh, one has to do these sort of things now and then. The people like
it, and it doesn't do me any harm."

“On the contrary," said Nugent, “I am sure it is a most healthy
exercise. But I thought it rather spoiled your leg for a top-boot."

Willy was known to favour knee-breeches as being especially becoming to
him, and at this, to my great relief, he turned his back upon us, and
plunged into an ostentatiously engrossing conversation with Connie. At
last we were in smooth water, and with almost a sigh of relief I heard
Nugent take up the thread of our discourse at the point where Willy had
broken it off.

It was evident that he could be pleasant enough when he chose; and
though I felt that this new development was almost as offensive in
another way as his deliberate dullness yesterday, I was now very
grateful for its timely help. At the same time, I bore in mind with
resentment my unremunerated toil during our ride, and reflected
bitterly on the fact that people who only talk when it pleases them,
receive far more credit when they do so than those who from a sense of
duty exhaust themselves conversationally.

Uncle Dominick and Henrietta had up to this not caused me a moment's
anxiety. We were now at dessert, and yet the flow of their discourse had
never flagged. In fact, my uncle seemed at present to be delivering a
species of harangue, to which Henrietta was attending with a polite
unconvinced smile. This was all as it should be, and my respect for
Henrietta's social gifts increased tenfold. Unfortunately, however, it
soon became evident that the discussion, whatever it was, was taking
rather too personal a tone, and my uncle's voice became so loud and
overbearing that Nugent and I were constrained to listen to him.

“You amaze me," he was saying. “I cannot believe that any sane person
can honestly hold such absurd theories. What! do you mean to tell me
that one of my tenants, a creature whose forefathers have lived for
centuries in ignorance and degradation, is my equal?"

“His degradation is merely the result of injustice," said Miss O'Neill,
coolly adjusting her pince-nez.

“I deny it," said my uncle, loudly. His usually pale face was flushed,
and his eyes burned. “But that is not the point. What I maintain is that
any fusion of classes such as you advocate, would have the effect of
debarring the upper while it entirely failed to raise the lower orders.
If you were to marry your coachman, as, according to your theories of
equality, I suppose you would not hesitate to do, do you think these
latent instincts of refinement that you talk about would make him a fit
companion for you and your family? You know as well as I do that such an
idea is preposterous. It is absurd to suppose that the natural
arrangement of things can be tampered with. This is a subject on which I
feel very strongly, and it shocks me to hear a young lady in your
position advance such opinions!"

Henrietta's face assumed an aggravating expression, clearly conveying
her opinion that further argument would be thrown away. Uncle Dominick
gulped down a glass of wine, and glared round the table. There was a
general silence, and I took advantage of it to make a move to the
drawing-room.

I was wholly taken aback by my uncle's violence, and could not help
fearing that the number of times his glass had been replenished had had
something to say to it. Willy's temper had also been so uncertain that
I dreaded an outbreak between him and his father, and, in the interval
of waiting for their reappearance, I found myself making the most absent
and ill-chosen answers to Henrietta's questions upon the culture and
political status of American women, while I listened anxiously for the
sound of the opening of the dining-room door. My only consolation was,
that Nugent would, for his own sake, do his best to keep the peace, and
I was surprised to find how much I relied on his powers of doing so.

In my preoccupied state of mind, it is not to be wondered at that
Henrietta soon appeared to come to the conclusion that I was incapable
of giving her any information on the subjects in which she was
interested, and that I was generally a person of limited abilities. She
leaned back in her chair with the exhausted air of one who relinquishes
a hopeless task, and, taking up a photograph-book, she tacitly made me
over to her sister.

Connie's ideas ran in less exalted grooves. The run of the day before
was to her a topic of inexhaustible interest; and when she found that my
humility in the matter of hunting equalled my ignorance, she expanded
into extreme graciousness, and was soon in the full tide of narration.
The story-teller who treats of hunting with any real enthusiasm
generally loses all mental perspective, and sacrifices artistic unity to
historical accuracy. Then, as now, I was amazed at the powers of memory
and merciless fidelity to detail with which those who have taken part in
a run can afterwards describe it, and I listened with reverence
befitting the neophyte to Connie's adventures by flood and field. Foxes
and fences, hounds and hunters, were revolving in my brain, when the
opening of the door brought the story to a conclusion, and Willy came
into the room, followed by Nugent. He marched directly to the sofa where
I was sitting, and deposited himself beside me with such determination
that the rebound of its springs almost lifted me into the air.

This behaviour was really intolerable. Willy had not before shown any
very pronounced partiality for me, and why he should have selected this
evening for a demonstration of affection it would be hard to say. One
thing was clear: it must be suppressed with a strong hand, or a
dead-lock would ensue. Nugent was standing on the hearthrug, with
apparently no prospect of entertainment before him save what he could
derive from talking to his sisters; while those two young ladies were
well aware that no reasonable hostess could ask them to dinner and
expect them to devote their evening to conversing with their brother,
and, pending action on my part, were sitting in expectant silence. I
turned upon Willy in desperation.

“You must talk to them," I hissed in his ear.

To which, with equal emphasis, he whispered back, “I won't!" fixing upon
me a blandly stubborn gaze that infuriated me beyond the bounds of
endurance.

I leaped from my seat, and, with a timely recollection of Nugent's
violin, I walked over to him and asked if he had remembered to bring it.
He admitted apologetically that it was in the hall, adding, with
unexpected modesty, that he had only brought it because I had asked him
to do so. I had some acquaintance with the ways of amateur violinists,
and speedily recognized the diffidence which conceals a yearning to
play at all hazards. My intention to dislike him was softened by the
discovery that he was not at all points so superior as I had believed,
and I was pleased to notice some hurry and trepidation in his manner
while he was tuning his violin. Henrietta advanced upon the piano with
an air of sisterly resignation, and, concealing a yawn, tapped a note
for Nugent to tune by.

While he was thus engaged, I cast an anxious eye round the room. My
uncle had now come in, and, with his elbow on the chimney-piece, was
looking into the fire. Connie had taken possession of the ancient
photograph-book which her sister had put down, and, in company with
Willy, was silently and methodically turning over its yellow pages. Well
did I know its contents. Ladies in preposterously inflated skirts, with
rows of black velvet round the tail; and gentlemen clad from head to
heel in decent black, each with his back to an Italian landscape, and
his tall hat on a Grecian pedestal near him--all alike undistinguishable
and unknown. I felt sincerely for Connie; but other occupation there was
none, and I had done my best on her behalf.

I was at first inclined to agree with Nugent in his own estimate of his
playing, and I saw with unworthy amusement that he was extremely
nervous; but as he went on he steadied down, and played with
considerable sweetness and delicacy. The keen notes vibrated in the dim,
lofty room, and tingling in the many hanging crystals of the old glass
chandelier. I forgot the indignation which he had yesterday aroused in
me, and remained leaning on the piano, conscious only of the pleasure I
was receiving, until the player ceased, and began to unscrew his bow
preparatory to putting it away.

“Please play something else," I said hastily. “Won't you try this Suite
of Corelli's? I know it so well."

“I am afraid my sister doesn't know the accompaniment," he answered,
with a dubious look at Henrietta, who was rising from the piano.

Her bored manner had already told me that she looked on accompanying her
brother as a task beneath her powers, and the thought struck me with
paralyzing conviction that I ought to have asked her to play a solo.
However, this was not the moment to rectify the error; Nugent was
lingering over the putting away of his violin, with an obvious desire to
play again.

“I suppose it would be too much to ask you to try it?" he said to me,
after another glance at Henrietta's unresponsive face.

“Perhaps if it was not very difficult I might be able----" I said, and
checked myself, remembering the snub I had received on that very
subject.

But now that I had admitted so much, Nugent held me to my word, and
firmly proceeded to arrange the piano part on the desk for me.

“I don't envy you, Miss Sarsfield," remarked Henrietta, with a cold
little laugh; “Nugent's ideas of counting are excessively primitive."

Decidedly Henrietta was annoyed.

“I am the class of savage who cannot count more than five," he replied,
addressing me; “but I do my best."

Miss O'Neill laughed again. “You will have to play it for him," she
said, moving away from the piano; “Nugent is a regular bully."

I scarcely liked being coerced in this way, but I yielded; and we played
the piece I had asked for, as well as several others, before I
remembered my duties as hostess. Willy had forsaken Connie and the
photograph-book, and had again left her and Henrietta to talk to each
other, while he propped himself against the chimney-piece, and gazed
moodily at Nugent and me.

I could not have believed that he would have left me in this dastardly
way to bear the burden and heat of the entertainment, and I made a
second effort to keep things going by begging Miss O'Neill to play. But
this time I was unsuccessful; she would not be propitiated. A look
passed between her and her sister, whose banjo I now had little doubt
had been secreted in the hall; while I, in violation of all the laws of
civility, had myself been monopolizing the piano. They both got up from
their places.

“I should have been delighted," said Henrietta, “but I am afraid it is
getting rather late. My dear Nugent"--calling to her brother, who was
carefully swaddling his violin preparatory to putting it away--“we
really ought to be getting home. The carriage must have been waiting
some time; and I am sure"--in a lower voice--“that Mr. Sarsfield has had
quite enough of us."

I looked at my uncle, who during the violin-playing had sunk into an
armchair, and had shaded his eyes with his hand, as if listening
attentively. He had not moved since we stopped, and looked almost as if
he were asleep; but there was something in his attitude that conveyed
the idea of deep dejection rather than of slumber.

The general stir of departure roused him. He rose slowly, and said good
night with a little more than his usual sombreness.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XIV.

IN SOCIETY.

    “Ah! Then was it all spring weather?
     Nay, but we were young and together."

    “Society is now one polished horde
     Formed of two mighty tribes, the Bores and Bored."


One day at Durrus was very like another. By the time I had been there
three weeks or a month, the days stretched out behind me into indefinite
length, separating me more and more from my past life.

Looking back to that time, it seems to resolve itself into one long
tête-à-tête with Willy. Quiet rides with him through the damp brown
woods, or now and then a day with the Moycullen hounds; drives to
return the visits of such of the natives as had called upon me; walks
across the turf bog to where the old graveyard hangs over the sea, to
watch the sun drop below the horizon. “Bound for America," says Willy.
“I wonder if you'd like to be going back with him?" I had no doubts in
my own mind on the subject, though I did not feel called upon to say so
to him. I was now quite certain that, in spite of various drawbacks, I
enjoyed my life at Durrus very much.

I have said that I had had callers. After the O'Neills, among the first
to come and see me were Mrs. Jackson-Croly and her daughters, and the
Burkes, whose acquaintance I had already made.

These ladies all made their appearance on the same afternoon; but before
the Burkes arrived I had an undiluted quarter of an hour of the
Jackson-Crolys, during which time the magnificence of Mrs. Croly's
manner was only equalled by the fashionable languor of her daughters'. I
naturally tried to talk to them of such local subjects as I knew
anything about, but found that the meanest topic on which they would
consent to converse was Dublin Castle, and the affability displayed to
them by the lord-lieutenant--“left'nant," they pronounced it--during the
past season. With these lofty themes I was quite unfitted to grapple,
and had sunk into a subordinate place in the conversation when the Miss
Burkes were announced.

They were both exceedingly cordial and friendly, and Miss Mimi began
almost immediately to rally me with ponderous facetiousness on my
exploits on the day of the hunt.

“Oh, Miss Sarsfield! what's this we hear about you and Mr. O'Neill?
Springing away through the country after the fox, and leaving poor
Willy in the ditch! Oh, fie!"

I feel that it is hopeless to convey any adequate idea of Miss Mimi's
voice by any system of spelling; but the fact that in her vocabulary
“fie," was pronounced “foy," may serve as some indication of her manner
of speech.

At her ingenuous observation I became aware that the eyes of Mrs.
Jackson-Croly and her two daughters were riveted upon me with
undisguised interest, and I hastened to explain how it was that Willy
had been left behind. But Miss Burke paid little heed; another and more
exciting topic had suggested itself to her.

“Well, Mrs. Croly, is it true that you're going to give us a dance at
Mount Prospect?" she began. “Why, you're a wonderful woman for
dissipation! We'd all he dying down with dulness only for you."

Mrs. Jackson-Croly, metaphorically speaking, descended with one leap
from the pedestal on which she had hitherto posed for my benefit.
Forgetful of the demeanour befitting one who moved in vice-regal
circles, she dragged her chair, still seated upon it, across the floor,
till she had placed herself knee to knee with Miss Burke, and they were
soon deep in calculation as to the number of “dancing gentlemen" who
could be relied on for the forthcoming ball.

A few days afterwards, Nugent O'Neill rode over to ask Willy and me to
lunch at Clashmore on the following day. I had once or twice met him and
Connie out hunting, and the latter and Henrietta had come over to call,
after their dinner at Durrus. On these occasions my acquaintance with
Connie had made rapid progress; she was a girl whom it was not
difficult to know and to like; but with her brother I seemed to have
come to a standstill. I must admit to having felt rather disappointed at
this, as since the night of the dinner-party I had believed that, under
favouring circumstances, he would be a person with whom I should find
myself on many points in sympathy. On this occasion he certainly did not
carry out my theory. After a great deal of profoundly uninteresting
conversation with Willy, in which a self-respecting wish not to be out
of it alone induced me to make a third, they both went round to the
stables, and I watched him ride away with a return of my old resentment
towards him.

Nevertheless, I had to allow to myself that he had not been more dull
than was suitable to the subject on which Willy had chosen to harangue
him--the question of how and where best to lay out and level a
tennis-ground in the lawn at Durrus was not one which lent itself to a
display of epigram, but I could not see why they should have talked
about it the whole time.

I speculated with a good deal of interest on Nugent's probable demeanour
at luncheon the next day. I could not make up my mind if his
unenthusiastic manner was the result of conceit or of an inborn distrust
of “American young ladies." It was certainly provoking that the one
Irishman I had hitherto met who seemed to have a few ideas beyond horses
and farming, was either too uninterested or too distrustful to expend
them upon me.

“I suppose it is the arrogant timidity of these eldest sons," I
reflected, with a touch of republican scorn. “I wish I could tell him
that he can talk to me without fear of ulterior designs on my part."

The day of the Clashmore repast was bright and cold. Willy had put
Alaska into the dog-cart to drive me there, and we all three started in
very good spirits.

“Willy," I said, as we spun along the hard road, “you have never told me
anything about The O'Neill. I am rather nervous at the idea of meeting
an Irish chieftain in his own lair. Ought I to kiss his hand? I am sure
you ought to have driven over a couple of fat oxen and a he-goat as
propitiatory offerings."

“By the hokey! I'll do nothing of the sort," said Willy. “I can tell
you, he is not the sort to refuse them if I did. But I've no objection
to your kissing his hand, if you like."

“How kind of you!"

“And he'll have still less. Mind you, he's a great old buck, and expects
every girl who goes to Clashmore to make love to him."

“Oh, Willy!" I cried, in real alarm, “for goodness' sake don't let him
come near me. I never have anything to say to old men, and yet they
invariably want to talk to me."

“Then, my dear, you'd better look out. The madam will have it in her
sleeve for you if he's too civil; she doesn't approve of his goings
on."

“Well, one comfort is, I shall probably be in his black books in five
minutes, as you say it is one of the seven deadly sins to call him
Mister O'Neill. I could no more call him 'O'Neill' than I could fly; I
should feel as if I were talking to a coachman."

“Oh, I dare say he'd put up with more than that from you! You're just
his sort. I know he'll tell every one you are 'a monstrous fine girl.'
You know, he likes them tall and dark and hand----"

“Do hold your tongue!" I interposed. “You are most offensive."

“Well, never mind," said Willy, consolingly. “Maybe he won't look at
you, after all. There's that big English girl we saw in church with them
last Sunday--Watson, I think Nugent said her name was--I dare say he
devotes himself to her all the time. Though," he added, “I don't see why
I shouldn't go in for her myself"--with a glance at me to see how his
shaft had sped.

“Oh, I hope you will!" I said; “it would interest me so much."

I thought Willy looked a little crestfallen, and he said no more on the
subject.

As I walked cautiously across the highly polished floor of the Clashmore
hall, preceded by an eminently respectable young footman, I was amused
to find that my mind was occupied in unfeigned admiration of the
cleanliness of the house. This, then, was the result of six weeks'
residence at Durrus. I had become so inured to untidiness, and a
generally lenient system of cleansing, that the most ordinary household
virtues had acquired positive instead of merely negative value.

The big, bright drawing-room seemed full of strangers, who, as I came
in, all stopped talking. I caught, however, my own name, spoken in a
voice unmistakable, even in the undertone in which it said, “I declare,
there's Miss Sarsfield herself!" and I had the uncomfortable conviction
that Miss Mimi Burke, in common with the rest of the room, had been
discussing me.

I advanced with uncertain speed across the wide space of glowing carpet
which separated me from Madam O'Neill, my last few steps being
considerably accelerated by the sudden uprisal from under my feet of an
abnormally lengthy dachshund, which had lain coiled unseen in my path.

“That detestable dog of Henrietta's!" said Madam O'Neill, as she shook
hands with me; “he is always getting in the way. How do you do, Miss
Sarsfield? Robert dear, this is Miss Sarsfield."

A stout, elderly gentleman, in a light suit of clothes, and with one of
the reddest faces I have ever seen, stepped forward with a very polite
bow and expansive smile, and shook hands with me. This was my host, but
the warning I had received against encouraging his attentions had so
alarmed me, that as soon as was decently possible I turned my back upon
him and began to talk to Henrietta. I had been aware all the time of
Willy's observation, and now, as I turned and met his malevolent eye, I
felt with dismay that my face was slowly turning a good fast colour,
analogous to Turkey red. Deeply conscious of this, and of the unsparing
glare of light from the large plate-glass windows, I spent some
singularly uncomfortable moments, until the booming of the gong
interrupted Miss O'Neill's comments on the weather.

I suppose that every one has at some period of their life felt the
absurdity of being led forth processionally to an entirely commonplace
meal, to which one is quite capable of walking unassisted on one's own
legs. I was never more keenly alive to this than on the present
occasion, when, thrusting my hand with some difficulty inside The
O'Neill's bulky arm, and feeling at least a head taller than he, we with
all dignity led the way into the dining-room.

I looked round the luncheon-table to see how people had arranged
themselves. My neighbour on the right was the Reverend Thomas Horan,
Rector of Rathbarry, a dull-looking man, with a saffron complexion, and
hair and beard of inky blackness, whose speech in private life was
little less unintelligible than his pulpit utterances. Opposite to me
sat Nugent O'Neill and Miss Watson. She was an ordinary type of smart
English girl, tall, fair, square shouldered, and well dressed, and
apparently rather fond of the sound of her own high, unmodulated voice.
She, evidently, had no difficulty in talking to Nugent. I caught from
time to time such fragments of their discourse as, “Saw your college get
a bump," “Up for commemoration week," “Ladies' eights"--by which latter
phrase I wondered if he were referring to her size in gloves.

The view to my right was impeded by the portly form of Miss Mimi Burke,
who was next Mr. Horan, she and that divine interchanging much lively
badinage, in tones suggestive of a duet between two trombones. Beyond
her I could just discern the feeble profile of a red-haired youth of
nineteen or twenty, who was subsequently introduced to me as Mr.
Barrett.

The O'Neill had been up to this too busy in dissecting two ducks of
unusually athletic physique to speak to me; but he had from time to
time--

    “Looked upon me with a soldier's eye,
     That liked, but had a rougher task in hand."

And when the last limb had been distributed, he turned his crimson face
and gleaming eyeglass upon me.

“And why haven't we seen you out with the hounds lately, Miss
Sarsfield?" he began, in a wheezy, luscious voice, with a suspicion of
brogue in it. “Nugent brought home such accounts of your doings that I
went out myself in hopes of seeing you show us all the way."

I modestly disclaimed all credit for the glories of the run which had
made such a sensation. “And I have only been able to go out once or
twice since," I added; “the meets have been so far away, and Willy has
only two horses."

“Ah! I wish you'd let me give you a mount. Your father has done as much
for me many a day when I was a youngster; and I think you and I ought to
be great friends"--this with a gaze of deep feeling from the unglazed
eye.

“Thank you; you are very kind," I murmured discomposedly, looking
towards the little madam to see if she were noting the behaviour of her
lord.

But no; the pink ribbons and marabout tufts of her elaborate cap were
nodding complacently towards Willy, who was talking to her with
enviable ease and fluency.

Willy's skill in talking to elderly ladies amounted to inspiration. At
present both Madam O'Neill and Miss Bessie Burke were hanging on his
words, with every appearance of rapt interest; while I, the beloved of
old men, could make no fitting rejoinder to the advances of my host.
“But then," I reflected, in self-extenuation, “old women are infinitely
preferable to old men."

“Ah yes!" The O'Neill went on, “how much you remind me of your father!
The same wonderful dark eyes----"

“Mine are grey," I interrupted, in as repressive a manner as possible.

The objects in question immediately underwent a close scrutiny.

“No matter--no matter; they have the same depth of expression. 'That
eye's dark charm 'twere vain to tell,' eh? Isn't that what Byron says?"

Of the appropriateness of the quotation my plate alone was in a position
to give an opinion, as on it my eyes were immovably fixed.

“I say, sir," said Nugent, suddenly, from across the table, “did you
know that Miss Watson was a great fortune-teller? You ought to show her
your hand."

Nothing loth, O'Neill laid his fat white hand on the table for Miss
Watson's inspection. She at once opened the campaign in a masterly
manner, by pronouncing it to be that of a “flirt," and I felt that the
chieftain's entertainment need no longer be a matter of anxiety to me.

Looking at his father with a peculiar expression, in which amusement
seemed to predominate, Nugent listened for a minute or two to Miss
Watson's ingenious insinuations and pronouncements. Then he turned to
me.

“Do you believe in chiromancy, Miss Sarsfield? It seems to me an
adaptable sort of science."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XV.

AN AMERICAN GIRL.

    “She's always been kind of off-ish and partic'lar for
        a gal that's raised in the woods."


Luncheon was over. The elders of the party had returned to the
drawing-room, where they were seated in a state of contented satiety,
discussing their servants, their gardens, and the Church of Ireland
Sustentation Fund, according to their age and kind.

In the billiard-room, a four-handed game was going on. Willy and Miss
Watson were playing Connie and Mr. Barrett; and, as billiards was not
one of my accomplishments, I preferred, notwithstanding polite offers
of instruction, to sit in a window-seat and look on.

Nugent at first undertook the office of marker; but as he tried at the
same time to explain the intricacies of the game to me, complications in
the scoring soon arose, accompanied by violent altercations with the
players. Finally, he was expelled with ignominy, it having been proved
that he had marked Miss Watson's most brilliant break to her opponents.

“I thought I should never have come alive out of that," he said, sitting
down in the window beside me; “Miss Watson looked as if she was going to
convince me with the butt end of her cue, and I have no ambition to have
a row with Willy. I shouldn't have much of a chance."

I thought, nevertheless, that he looked well able to take care of
himself, as he leaned back against the window-shutter, and began to
roll a cigarette, while the sun slanted in upon his light, firm figure
and well-shaped head, striking a pleasant dazzle into his blue eyes as
he glanced at the players.

“Do you know Mr. Jimmy Barrett?" he asked, in cautious tones, as that
youth, his freckled face pink with anxiety, sprawled across the table to
play his stroke.

“No, I don't know him, but I remember seeing him out hunting."

“He's a very fine rider, but that's about all he's good for. From the
appearance of things at present, he will have cut the cloth in the
course of the next five minutes. If Connie is going to give lessons in
billiards, she ought to keep a private table for her disciples."

Nugent had laid his tobacco-pouch on the seat beside him while he was
speaking; it was covered with crimson plush, and his monogram,
sumptuously worked in gold thread, adorned the flap. I thought it, on
the whole, rather vulgar.

“I am thankful that I was not decoyed into playing," I said. “I must say
all my sympathies are with Mr. Barrett; he did not want to play in the
least, and I am sure he does not look as if he were enjoying himself."

“I deny that he was decoyed into playing," said Nugent, argumentatively,
lighting his cigarette and leaning back again with an air of leisurely
satisfaction; “and, anyhow, he is not a case in point. The mere fact
that you are an American is about fifty points in your favour. You would
probably lick all our heads off by the sheer force of instinct and power
of intimidation." He took up his tobacco-pouch, and looked at it
absently. “Yes, you're a great nation. For instance, this very fine
thing is of Yankee origin, and I don't believe the worker of it had ever
done anything of the kind before. It was done, as the Irishman played
the fiddle, 'by main strength,' and yet look at it!"

“It's very gay," I said, regarding it with chilly disfavour.

Nugent looked at me meditatively, as he put it back into his pocket.
“Does that mean professional jealousy?" he asked. “Are you also a worker
of tobacco-pouches?"

“I can't work any more than I can play billiards," I said, with some
enjoyment of the admission.

“No? What a pity!" said Nugent, a little inattentively. “Do you know, I
once taught an American girl billiards, and after she had played for a
week, she used to beat me pretty nearly every time."

“But I think I told you before I was not an American girl," I said
energetically. “Every one here persists in calling me American, and I am
nothing of the kind; I am Irish!"

“It seems to me you are very anxious to 'go back on' your native land,"
he said, looking at me through his half-closed eyelids; “you won't allow
yourself to be called American, and you don't even speak the language."

“That is the regular British fallacy. You all expect us to talk through
our noses, and say, 'Wal, stranger.'"

“Not at all. I am awfully well up in modern American fiction, and I know
all about the Boston young woman and her high-class conversation. I
assure you, there is no one on earth that I should be so much afraid
of."

“I am sure you took that idea from Henry James's 'Bostonians,' but they
are not all as superior and conscientious as Olive Chancellor was in
that. Certainly I am not, and I lived for a long time in Boston."

“Really!" he said, opening his eyes; “I had no idea of that. I think,"
he went on, after a moment's pause, “you might have mentioned it before,
and saved me from giving myself away as I did."

“You have said nothing very compromising so far," I said, stooping down
to help Henrietta's dachshund in an attempt to scramble on to my lap;
“but I thought it kinder to warn you while there was yet time."

He laughed rather foolishly, and slowly knocked the ash off his
cigarette against the window-sash. “All the same," he said, “I think I
was quite right in what I said. By the way, I got a lot of new fiddle
music to-day. I wonder if you would come and have a look at it? Perhaps
we could try over some?"

“I am afraid it is rather late," I said hesitatingly. “I should like to
do so very much, but I think the game must be nearly over, and we ought
to go home then; it gets dark so quickly."

“Well, perhaps you would allow me to bring it over to Durrus some day?
My sister is very slow at reading music, and I think I remember your
saying that you did not mind playing accompaniments."

I did remember saying so quite well, and also the manner in which the
intimation had been received; but I magnanimously determined to let
bygones be bygones, and consented with a good grace.

The game was, as I had said, coming to a conclusion. Willy was playing,
and evidently playing extremely well--striding round the table with
silent purposeful rapidity, while Miss Watson triumphantly proclaimed
the score as his break mounted. Connie, ignoring the dejection of her
unhappy little partner, was leaning back against the wall, humming a
little bitter tune, with the air of having lost all interest in the
proceedings.

“I think Connie looks as if she had enough of Jimmy's billiard-playing,"
said Nugent, with brotherly discernment; “she doesn't like being beaten
a bit. There's an end of Willy's break. Now, Jimmy," he called out,
“they only want three of game--42 plays 97; it's a good game to win!"

Mr. Barrett advanced to the table, looking with a sickly smile to his
partner for an encouragement which he did not receive. Nugent and I left
our window, and came closer to see the finish of the game. We had not
long to wait. Taking prolonged aim at the red ball, Mr. Barrett dealt
his own a faltering tap; it rolled slowly across the table, and, without
touching either of the other balls, sank unobtrusively into a side
pocket.

“Three to us. Game!" said Miss Watson. “I think we did pretty well, Mr.
Sarsfield. I told you you were good at games as soon as I looked at your
hand."

“Why, have you had your fortune told, Willy?" I said.

“Yes," he said shortly. “Are you quite sure you've told me
everything?"--turning from me to Miss Watson.

“Oh dear, no! not more than half. I shall think about your hand, and
tell you the rest another day," said Miss Watson, with great suavity.
“Irishmen's hands are so puzzling--so contradictory, you know; but I
suppose all Irish people are that, aren't they?"

“Never mind, Mr. Barrett," I heard Connie saying; “we will play them
again some other time. Now, good people, won't you all come and have
some tea?" she continued. “You had better not lose time, or there will
be none left. Mr. Horan gets through tea and cake like a Sunday
school--four cups at least, and two slices with every cup! So if you and
Willie are going to have any more palmistry, Georgie, we certainly shall
not wait for you."

In the drawing-room, we found Madam O'Neill, Henrietta, and Mr. Horan
sitting over the tea-table; the latter with his handkerchief spread over
his knees, and a general greasiness of aspect suggestive of buttered
toast. The Burkes had gone, and, to my unbounded relief, The O'Neill
did not appear.

“It's just as I said," whispered Connie; “there isn't an atom of toast
or hot cake left. Did you see mamma just now hiding the sponge-cake
behind the slop-basin to get it out of his way? I see the Burkes have
gone," she went on. “If you could only have heard old Mimi singing your
praises before you came to-day! She said it was 'deloightful to have
that sweet young creature settled in the country,' and that,
'considering you had been brought up among the Americans, you really
spoke English as well as she did.' Was not that what she said, Nugent?"

Her brother laughed, and sat down beside me.

“You see, what I told you is quite true," he said, “though perhaps I did
not put it as nicely as Miss Burke did. As an American young lady, you
are a failure in these parts."

“I am delighted to hear it," I replied. “If you had not formed a
preconceived idea that I was a Yankee, I know you would have noticed my
Cork brogue at once."

While we were talking, Willy came up.

“Are you nearly done your tea?" he demanded. “The trap is at the door
some time."

He remained standing before me, as if he expected me to get up at once.
That something had annoyed him was evident, and, feeling that delay was
unadvisable, I swallowed my tea with all possible despatch, and made my
adieux.

Nugent came to the hall door with us.

“Then, may I come over on Tuesday?" he said, tucking in the rug for me,
while Willy silently picked up the reins, and took the whip out of the
rest, “or any other day that would suit you would do for----" The rest
of the sentence was lost, as Willy, without further ceremony, drove
away.

“Very well--Tuesday!" I screamed back, as we whirled down the avenue.
“My dear Willy, I don't know why you were in such a desperate hurry," I
went on, rather crossly.

“Well, how was I to know he had anything more to say?" retorted Willy,
with equal ill-temper. “I'm sure he had plenty of time to settle
everything before we left the house. I wasn't going to keep the mare
standing, if he chose to go on prating there."

“I don't suppose another five seconds would have done her any mortal
injury, and I think you might have risked it for the sake of civility."

He did not answer, and we drove along in silence, Willy maintaining a
demeanour of unbending severity, and affecting to be altogether occupied
with his driving.

“Very well," I said to myself, “if he likes to sulk, he may; I won't
take any notice of him."

No word was spoken for at least a mile. Alaska trotted steadily on,
under the leafless beeches, and along the road by the sea, till she at
length slackened to walk up a hill.

“Are you cold, Theo?" Willy did not turn his head, but I felt that the
olive branch had been extended.

“Not particularly," I said, as indifferently as possible.

“I put a wrap into the trap for you"--stretching a long arm over the
back of the seat, and dragging a cloak from the depths. “You must be
perished in that thin coat. Here, let me put this round you."

He wrapped me in it with unnecessary care, and while he was doing so he
said suddenly,

“I'm awfully sorry if I was rude to you. You know that----" His voice
broke, and he stopped as suddenly as he had begun. I put up my hand to
fasten the cloak for myself, and was rather startled to find it caught
and fervently squeezed.

“Oh!" I said, withdrawing my hand sharply, “you were not in the least
rude to me. I did not mind a bit. We had a very pleasant day on the
whole, I think," I continued inconsequently; “and did you see how
beautifully I behaved to The O'Neill?"

I fancy Willy looked a little disappointed at his apology being disposed
of so quickly.

“No, I can't say I did," he answered, in an injured way. “I had plenty
to do talking to the madam."

“Yes, I saw you. I was looking at you with the deepest admiration all
through lunch. And, by the way, what do you think of Miss Watson? She
seems to be a wonderful billiard-player."

“I thought you were too busy talking to Nugent to notice what we were
doing," said Willy, with some return of sulkiness. “It didn't look as if
you found it so hard to talk to him, as you're always saying you do."

“But I assure you we were looking at the game, Willy. I don't
understand billiards, so you can't expect me to watch every stroke."

“Well, I only know that I spoke to you one time, and you were so much
taken up with talking about Boston or something, that you never even
heard me."

“Then you must have said it absolutely in a whisper," I said, in heated
self-defence. “Mr. O'Neill was not saying anything in the least
interesting, only that he should never have thought I had been brought
up in America."

“H'm!" said Willy, in a more mollified tone. “He must have meant that
for a compliment. I know what he thinks of Yankee girls. He's told me
many a queer story of one he met at Cannes last winter."

We rounded a turn in the road, and in the twilight I could see the
Durrus woods spreading darkly down to the sea. It would take another ten
minutes to reach home, and, though Willy was simmering down, I knew that
we were still on dangerous ground.

“What did Miss Watson say of your hand?" I asked, with the view of
changing the conversation. “Did she tell you that you had 'no sense of
humour, and homicidal tendencies, combined with unusual
conscientiousness'? That's what a man once told me."

“No," answered Willy, quite seriously; “she didn't say very much about
my character. She was looking at my line of heart most of the time, I
think. She told me that I would have 'two great passions' in my life,
and that I was to be married soon." He stopped, and looked at me.

“How exciting!" I said hurriedly. “My man did not tell me any of those
interesting sort of things."

“She said my line of fate was broken," resumed Willy, “whatever that may
mean. She told me I had a very good line of intellect, but it wasn't
properly developed. I dare say the last part of that's true enough," he
added, with a sigh. “I never got a chance to learn anything when I was
a boy. The governor sent me from one dirty little school to another for
a couple or three years, and then the national schoolmaster had a go at
me, and that's about all the education I ever had."

“I dare say you get on just as well without being very good at classics
and those sort of things. And, you see, you passed your exam. for your
captaincy in the West Cork quite easily," I said, with a rather lame
attempt at consolation.

“That's quite a different thing; any fool could do that. What makes me
sick is to see Nugent and chaps like him, who have been to Harrow and
Oxford, and all the rest of it--and here I've been stuck all my life,
without a chance to get level with them. It's when I'm talking to you
that I feel what an ignorant brute I am!"

“I hate to hear you talk like that, Willy," I said, really distressed.
“I never thought you so--not for an instant. On the contrary, I think
you know more than any one I ever met--about practical things; and if
you don't look where you're going, you will drive over that old woman
who is going in at the gate"--as we turned sharply off the road at the
Durrus lodge--“and I believe it is that dreadful old Moll, too. I am
thankful to say I have not seen her for ever so long."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XVI.

FERRETING.

    “I do perceive here a divided duty."


It was early in December, a showery, blustry afternoon; but I was
sitting out of doors in the hay. The men had been cutting away the great
rick in the haggard; they had taken a slice off it, down almost to the
ground, and I had burrowed myself a comfortable bed among the soft
trusses, with my back against the bristling, newly shorn wall of hay
that towered above me like a gable. The dogs were standing beside me in
different attitudes of intensest attention, their eyes fixed, like
mine, upon a hole in the foundations of the rick, from which at this
moment a pair of legs in corduroys and gaiters were protruding.

“Have you come to them yet?" I called out.

A muffled grunt was all that I could hear in answer; but after a moment
or two, the body belonging to the legs was drawn out of the hole.

“I've got one of the brutes," said Willy, holding up his hand, with a
ferret hanging limply from it. “I don't know how I'll get the other;
those rats must be miles back in the rick. I'll have to go up for one of
the young Sweenys to help me to move some of the stones under the rick."

“I think in that case I shall go home," I said. “I suppose you'll take
hours over it."

“Oh no! Do wait a bit; we won't be any time. You can have my coat if
you're cold," said Willy, dropping the reclaimed ferret into its bag.
“I'll be back in a jiffy."

He climbed the wall of the haggard, and took a short cut across the
field to where the whitewashed walls of Sweeny's cottage showed through
the red twigs of the leafless fuchsia hedge that incongruously
surrounded it.

I took out my watch as soon as he had started, and saw that it was
half-past three. Willy seemed to have forgotten that this Tuesday
afternoon was the one on which Nugent had said he would come over. I had
taken care to say something about it at breakfast, but had done it so
lamely and inopportunely that I was not sure whether Willy had heard me;
and a kind of awkwardness had prevented me from reminding him of it when
he had asked me after luncheon to come out with him to the haggard,
where a thriving colony of rats had been that morning discovered.

Willy and I were now on terms of the most absolute intimacy. His daily
companionship had become second nature to me--something which I accepted
as a matter of course, which gave me no trouble, and was in all ways
pleasant. But, for all that, I had begun to find out that in some occult
way I was a little afraid of him. He was unexpectedly and minutely
observant, and, where I was concerned, appeared to be able to take in my
doings with the back of his head. It was this gift, combined with his
unostentatious acuteness, that made me sometimes feel foolish when I
least wished it, and lately had made any mention of Nugent's name a
difficulty to me.

At all events, at this particular moment I did not feel disposed to
explain matters, and I settled myself again in the hay, hoping that the
capture of the ferret would allow me, by the natural course of things,
to get home in time without having to remind Willy of my expected
visitor.

The demesne farm, as it was called, was at some distance from the
house--at least ten minutes' walk down a stony lane, worn into deep ruts
by the passing of the carts of hay; and now that the ruts had been
turned into pools by heavy showers, it was anything but a pleasant walk.
The boreen passed through the fields in which Willy had schooled Alaska;
it came out into the road near the lodge, and thence led directly to the
house, whose gleaming slate roof and tall chimneys I could see from
where I was sitting, above the trees of the plantation. The short
December day was already beginning to close in; the setting sun was
level with my eyes, and was sending broad rays up the long slope that
lay between the farm and the sea. Everything for the moment was
transfigured; all the wet stones and straw lying about the yard shone
and glistened. The pigs were splashing through pools of liquid gold; and
the geese, who were gabbling in an undertone near the hayrick, looked
blue on the shadow side, and silver-yellow on the side next the sun--one
could believe them capable of laying nothing but golden eggs. The wind
was going down with the sun, and it seemed as if we should have no more
rain; but there was a dangerous-looking black cloud over Croaghkeenen. I
wondered if Nugent had come. That cloud certainly meant rain; perhaps it
would serve as an excuse to get home.

Willy was as good as his word about coming back quickly, and brought
with him not one, but two small sons of the house of Sweeny, with shock
heads of hair, as fluffy as dandelion seed, and almost as white, and big
grey eyes that looked doubtfully at me from under the blackest lashes
and out of the dirtiest faces I had ever seen in my life.

“Come, Timsy," said Willy to the smaller of the two, “in you go; and if
you get a grip of him at all, hold on to him, no matter if he eats the
nose off your face."

In no wise discouraged by this injunction, Timsy crawled into the hole,
until nothing but the muddy soles of his bare feet were visible. But the
ferret was evidently beyond human reach. I sat impatiently enough,
looking on, and trying to summon up courage to say that I would go home,
when I felt a drop or two of rain on my hand, and saw that the heavy
cloud now shut Croaghkeenen altogether out of view, and that a thick
shower was coming across the sea and along the slopes of Durrus. In
another instant we were enveloped in a gusty whirl of rain.

“Run to the Sweenys', Theo!" cried Willy, jumping up from his knees, and
abandoning his attempt to push little Sweeny deeper into the hole; “we
must shelter there."

“Couldn't we get home?" I said, standing undecidedly in the downpour,
and thinking with despair that my deserted visitor was possibly arriving
at Durrus now.

“No; you'd be drowned getting there. Come on."

We ran up the lane as fast as was possible from the nature of it, with
the mud splashing up at every step, the rain trickling down the backs of
our necks, and the dogs racing along with us, getting very much in the
way by ridiculous jumps at the bag in which Willy carried the ferret,
and evidently believing that this unusual rushing through the mud was
only a prelude to something far more thrilling. I picked my way after
Willy through the Sweenys' yard, along a path which ran precariously
between a manure heap and a pool of dirty water, and saw Mrs. Sweeny
flinging open her door to receive us.

“Oh, ye craytures! ye're dhrowned! Come in asthore. Get out, ye
divil!"--slapping the bony flanks of a calf which was trying to thrust
itself into the house. “Turn them hins out, Batty! Indeed, 'tis a
disgrace to ask ye into that dirty little house, and me afther plucking
a goose."

We entered the low, narrow doorway; and the hens, seeing that they were
hemmed in, and disdaining even at this extreme moment to yield to
Batty's practised pursuit, took to their wings, and flew past our heads
through the doorway with varying notes of consternation.

“Did anny wan iver see the like of thim hins?" demanded Mrs. Sweeny,
dramatically, while she dragged forward a greasy-looking kitchen chair.
“I'm fairly heart-scalded with them--the monkeys of the world! Sit down,
ochudth, sit down why!" she went on, addressing me, her broad red face
beaming with pride and hospitality. “Indeed, me little place isn't fit
for the likes of ye! Sure, wouldn't ye sit down, Masther Willy, till I
get ye a dhrink of milk? Run away, Bridgie"--this in an undertone to a
grimy little girl--“and dhrive in the cows."

She produced another chair for Willy, the discrepancy in the length of
whose legs was corrected by a convenient dip in the mud floor of the
cottage, and Willy sat down, and at once began a diffuse and cheerful
conversation with her.

The fates certainly seemed to be against me. This shower would probably
last for some time, and it would be impossible to say that I wanted to
go home until it was over. I looked at my watch; it was already nearly
four. Nugent would very likely come early--he had said that he would be
over some time before tea--and would hear that I had gone out, and had
left no message or explanation of any kind for him. It was very
exasperating, but, as long as this deluge of rain lasted, all I could do
was to sit still and possess my soul in as much patience as possible.

The cabin had more occupants than, in its doubtful light, I had at first
noticed. In the smoky shadow of the overhanging chimney-place was
huddled, on a three-legged stool, a very small old man in knee-breeches
and a tail-coat, who was smoking a short pipe, and still held in his
hand the battered tall hat which he had taken off on our entrance. He
was our hostess's father-in-law, one of the oldest tenants on the
estate, and he sat, as I had often seen the old country men in the
cabins sit, smoking and dozing over the fire, and looking hardly more
alive to what was going on than the grey, smouldering lumps of turf on
the hearth. In the dusky recess at the foot of a four-poster bed, which
blocked up one of the small windows, Batty and two other children were
hiding behind each other, and were staring at us as young birds might.
Pat and Jinny were vulgarly snuffing among Mrs. Sweeny's pots and pans,
with an affectation of starvation which but ill-assorted with what I
knew of their recent luncheon. Now they had come, with stunning
unexpectedness, on a cat, crouched on the dresser, and, when called off
by Willy on the very eve of battle, remained for the rest of their visit
in agonized contemplation of her security. From a hencoop in the corner
by the bed came faint cluckings; the goose which Mrs. Sweeny had been
plucking lay with its legs tied beside the red earthen pan, in which it
might have seen its own breast feathers, and tried to console itself by
pecking feebly at the yellow meal which had been spilt on the ground in
front of the chickens' coop.

Mrs. Sweeny was sitting on a kind of rough settle, between the
other window and the door of an inner room. She was a stout,
comfortable-looking woman of about forty, with red hair and quick blue
eyes, that roved round the cabin, and silenced with a glance the
occasional whisperings that rose from the children.

“And how's the one that had the bad cough?" asked Willy, pursuing his
conversation with her with his invariable ease and dexterity. “Honor her
name is, isn't it?"

“See, now, how well he remembers!" replied Mrs. Sweeny. “Indeed, she's
there back in the room, lyin' these three days. Faith, I think 'tis like
the decline she have, Masther Willy."

“Did you get the doctor to her?" said Willy. “I'll give you a ticket if
you haven't one."

“Oh, indeed, Docthor Kelly's afther givin' her a bottle, but shure I
wouldn't let her put it into her mouth at all. God knows what'd be in
it. Wasn't I afther throwin' a taste of it on the fire to thry what'd it
do, and Phitz! says it, and up with it up the chimbley! Faith, I'd be
in dread to give it to the child. Shure, if it done that in the fire,
what'd it do in her inside?"

“Well, you're a greater fool than I thought you were," said Willy,
politely.

“Maybe I am, faith," replied Mrs. Sweeny, with a loud laugh of
enjoyment. “But if she's for dyin', the crayture, she'll die aisier
without thim thrash of medicines; and if she's for livin', 'tisn't
thrusting to them she'll be. Shure, God is good--God is good----"

“Divil a betther!" interjected old Sweeny, unexpectedly.

It was the first time he had spoken, and having delivered himself of
this trenchant observation, he relapsed into silence and the smackings
at his pipe.

“Don't mind him at all, your honour, miss," said his daughter-in-law,
seeing my ill-concealed amusement. “Shure, he's only a silly owld man."

“He's a good deal more sensible than you are," said Willy, returning to
the subject of Honor.

The rain poured steadily down. I thought of Nugent, and could fancy his
surprise at hearing that I was not at home. It was not, I argued to
myself, so much that I was sorry to miss him, as that I hated being
rude; and it certainly was rude to have gone out on the day he had
settled to come, without even leaving a message. What an amazing gift of
the gab Willy had! Rain or no rain, it was clear that he and Mrs. Sweeny
meant to talk to one another for the rest of the afternoon.

The old man in the chimney-corner had watched me during all this time,
and muttered to himself every now and then--what, I could not
understand. We must have been sitting there for ten minutes at least,
when the two boys whom Willy had left to look for the ferret came
dripping in, with the object of their search safely housed in a bag, and
silently stationed themselves along with their brothers and sisters in
the corner by the bed.

“Is the rain nearly over?" I asked the elder.

“I dunno, miss," he replied, bashfully rubbing the sole of his foot up
and down the shin of the other leg.

“I can tell you that," said Willy, getting up and going to the door. “I
don't think it looks like clearing for another quarter of an hour."

“Then I don't know what I can do," I said, in unguarded consternation.

“Why," said Willy, turning round and looking at me with his hands in his
pockets, “what's the hurry?"

“There is no hurry exactly," I said, feeling very small and cowardly;
“but I thought you knew--at least, I think I told you this morning, that
Mr. O'Neill said he would come over to-day."

I wondered if this simple sentence gave any indication of the effort it
was to me to say it.

“I can't say I remember anything about it," Willy answered, in what I am
sure he thought a crushingly chilly voice.

“Oh yes, indeed I did tell you," I said, getting up and following him to
the door; “but you sneezed just as I was saying it, and the voice is not
yet created that could be heard through one of your sneezes."

I knew that he was rather proud than otherwise of his noisy sneezes, and
I laughed servilely, and looked up, hoping that he would laugh too. But
there was nothing approaching to amusement in his face. It was red and
forbidding, as he looked out into the rain that was thrashing down in
the dirty yard. He had still a good deal of hay and hayseed about his
coat and hat, and altogether I thought it was not one of his most
becoming moments.

“I don't know if you'd like to start in that," he said; “but if you
would, I'm quite ready to go with you."

If I had been alone, I should probably have faced a wetting in order to
get back to the house; but now I was both too proud and too shy to
accept Willy's offer.

“I think I shall wait a little longer," I said, going back to my chair
by the fire.

“Himself's afther sayin'," said Mrs. Sweeny, as I sat down, “that he'd
think 'twas your father he was lookin' at, an' you sittin' there a while
ago."

Old Sweeny removed his pipe from his lips, and cleared his throat.

“Manny's the time I seen the young masther sit there," he said, in a
sort of harsh whisper, turning his bleared and filmy old eyes towards
me--“the way she"--he pointed a crooked forefinger at me--“is now,
afther he bein' out shootin' or the like o' that; 'Be domned to ye,
Sweeny, ye blagyard,' he'd say to me, 'dickens a shnipe is there left on
yer land with your dhraining; I'll have ye run out of the place,' he'd
say. That's the very way he'd talk to me, as civil and pleasant as
yerself. Begob, ye have the very two eyes of him, an' the grand long
nose of him!"

I acknowledged the compliment as well as I knew how, and old Sweeny went
on again, punctuating his sentences with long and noisy pulls at his
pipe.

“Faith, there was manny a wan of the Durrus tinants would rather 'twas
their own son was goin' to Ameriky than him when he went; and manny a
wan too that'd have walked to Cork to go to his funeral. That was the
quare comin' home that he had--to die an' be berrid in the town o' Cork.
I'll niver forget that time. Shure the night he died in Cork--'twas the
night before the owld masther dyin' too--I wasn't in me bed, but out in
the shed with a cow that was sick. There was carridges dhriving the
Durrus avenue that night," he said, his voice getting lower and huskier;
“I heard them goin' the road, an' it one o'clock in the morning! And the
big shnow comminced afther that agin."

“What carriages were they?" I asked, with a little superstitious shiver.

The old man looked furtively round, and took his pipe out of his mouth.

“God knows!" he said mysteriously; “God knows! But they say there do be
them that wait for the Sarsfields agin they're dyin'. There was wan that
seen the black coach and four horses goin' wesht the road, over the bog,
the time the owld man--that's Theodore's father--died; and wansht," he
went on impressively, “there was a Sarsfield out, that time the Frinch
landed beyond in Banthry Bay, and the English cot him an' hung him; but
those people took him and dhragged him through hell and through
det'th, and me mother's father heard the black coach taking him wesht to
Myross Churchyard."

Old Sweeny had let his pipe go out during the telling of the story, and
he left me to make what I could of it, while he poked about for a piece
of burning turf wherewith to rekindle his pipe. Willy was still standing
by the door.

“I think it's cleared up enough for you to start now," he said coldly,
“and if you want to get back to the house, you'd better start before it
comes on heavy again."

“Oh, very well, if you like," I answered, with equal indifference. “Good
afternoon, Mrs. Sweeny."

Mrs. Sweeny was taking a bowl from the dresser, from which haven of
refuge she had driven her cat with one swing of her brawny arm. It shot
past Willy out of the door, followed by a flying white streak, which
inference rather than eyesight told me was composed of the pursuing Pat
and Jinny.

“Look at that, now!" remarked the cat's mistress; “that overbearin' owld
cat'd be sittin' there, thwarting thim dogs, and she well able to run
for thim; an' I wouldn't begridge them to ketch her nayther. She's a
little wandhering divil that have no call to the place." She came
forward with the bowl in her hand. “See here, Masther Willy; here's
eight beautiful pullet's eggs, the first she iver laid, an' you'll carry
them wesht to the house for Miss Sarsfield to ate for her brekfish--mind
that, now!" She gave him a slap on the back. “Och, there's no fear but
he'll mind!" she said, winking at me. “He'd do more than that for
yourself, and small blame to him!"

Willy took the bowl from her without taking any notice either of the
innuendo or the slap which accompanied it, and marched out of the house
with sulky dignity.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER XVII.

POTATO CAKES.

     “The tenacious depths of the quicksand, as is usual in such cases,
     retained their prey."


The rain was not by any means over when we came out into the field. It
was half-past four, but, though the sun had sunk, the clouds had lifted,
and the misty orange light of the after-glow filled the air. A slim
scrap of a moon had slipped up over the hill to the eastward, and the
bats were swooping round our heads as we picked our way across the muddy
yard of the demesne farm.

“I think you'll find the field drier than the bohireen," said Willy, in
the same distant voice which he had last spoken; “we can get over the
wall here."

He took my hand to help me over, but dropped it as quickly as possible,
and walked on with unnecessary haste, keeping a little in front of me.
The field was, as he had said, rather better than the lane, but my feet
sank in the soaked ground, the pace at which we were going took my
breath away, and I began to be left behind. Willy still stalked on
unrelentingly, with the enviable unpetticoated ease of mankind in wet
weather.

“I wish you wouldn't go so fast," I called out at last. “I can't
possibly keep up if you go at that pace."

He slackened at once.

“I thought you wanted to go fast," he answered, without looking back.

“I don't particularly care," I said, as I struggled up alongside of
him. “I should think Mr. O'Neill must have gone home some time ago."

Willy made no comment. I took out my handkerchief and wiped the last
raindrops from my face, feeling a good deal aggrieved by his behaviour.

“Your cap's all wet too," he said, looking down at me from under his
eyelids--“soaking, and so is your coat," putting his hand on my shoulder
for a moment. “I think I ought to have carried you home in a
turf-basket. Look at this bad bit here we've got to go through."

“Thank you," I said snappishly, taking off my wet cap and shaking the
rain from it as I went, “I should rather not. I am about as wet as I can
be now. It certainly was capital weather to go out ferreting in."

We were now at the “bad bit" of which Willy had spoken,--a broad, dark
stripe, vivid green by daylight,--across a hollow in the field, with a
gleam of water here and there in it.

“You'd much better let me carry you over this," said Willy, stopping.

“No, thank you," I said again, eyeing, however, with an inward tremor,
the long distances between the tussocks of grass which might serve as
stepping-stones. “You have the eggs to carry, and I have no wish to be
dropped with them into the bog."

“Ah! nonsense now; you know there's no fear of that," he said, and put
his arm round me as if to lift me. “Do let me."

“I am not going to be carried," I said, with determination. “If you'd
only let me alone, I should get over quite well."

He did not take his arm away, and bent down over me.

“You're always getting angry with me these times," he said.

“No, indeed I'm not," I answered, trying to speak pleasantly, and to
move forward at the same time.

His quick breathing was at my ear, and for one moment his lips touched
my hair; the next I was floundering with a burning face through the
deepest of the quagmire. At every step my feet sank ankle-deep; I
dragged out each in succession with an effort that nearly pulled my
boots off, and when I gained firm ground again, my feet had become
shapeless brown objects, weighed down with mud, with which my skirt was
also thickly coated. Willy had made no further effort to help me, and,
having followed me across with caution, walked silently beside me as I
hurried along, trying to ignore my uncomfortable and ignoble plight.

But one field now divided us from the road, and as I scrambled up on to
the high fence I heard wheels, and saw something moving along it away
from the Durrus gate.

“That must be Mr. O'Neill's trap!" I cried excitedly, jumping down after
Willy, who was already in the field. “Oh, Willy, do run and stop him! I
must explain----"

“There's no earthly use in trying to catch him now," Willy answered
morosely. “I'm not going to kill myself running after him, like a fool,
for nothing at all."

“Very well," I rejoined; “if you won't go, I will."

My indignation with Willy alone sustained me through that dreadful run.
I had to cut diagonally across the field in order to intercept Nugent.
The ground was soft and sticky; my mud-encumbered skirt clung round me;
and I should have had scant chance of catching him but for the fact that
the road, curving a little at this point, led over a steep and stony bit
of hill. I reached the wall of the field just as the horse was breaking
into a trot at the top of the hill; but, fortunately for me, the groom
at the back of the dog-cart saw the walking-stick which I feebly
brandished to attract his attention--I had no breath wherewith to
shout--and, recognizing me, called to his master to stop.

Nugent pulled up, and, turning round, took off his hat with a face of
such astonishment that I became all at once aware of the appearance
which I must present, but I came forward with a gallant attempt to
appear unconscious of my heated face and general dishevelledness.

“How are you?" I panted. “I intended to be at home. Won't you----?"
Here my breath failed me, and I was obliged to eke out my sentence with
a gesture in the direction of Durrus.

“Oh, thanks; it doesn't matter in the least. Don't let me take you back
any sooner than you had intended," replied Nugent, in a voice that told
he had been nursing his wrath to keep it warm.

“I was going home," I said, more intelligibly. “I am very sorry, but we
were delayed by the rain."

He got out of the dog-cart and shook hands with me across the low wall,
on the farther side of which I was standing.

“There has certainly been a pretty heavy shower," he said, looking at me
uncertainly, but, as I thought, with a dawning amusement.

“Hasn't there? Awful!" I said, smearing my wet hair back behind my ears,
and putting on the cap which I had clutched convulsively in my hand
during my run across the field. “We had to shelter in a cottage for ever
so long."

“Who is we?"

I looked round for my late companion, but he was nowhere to be seen.

“Willy was with me," I said; “but he declared that it was no use trying
to catch you, and--and I suppose he has gone home."

Nugent said nothing, but climbed on to the wall with as much dignity as
his macintosh would permit, and helped me over it. I was very
unfortunate, I inwardly reflected; I first got wet through, and then one
cross young man after another dragged me over these horrible wet stone
walls. However, I said aloud--

“You must come back and have some tea; it is quite early still."

He hesitated.

“Thanks, I am not sure if I shall have time; but perhaps, in any case,
you had better let me drive you home."

The step of the dog-cart was a very high one, and as I put my foot on it
to get up, the full beauties and proportions of my boot--a shapeless
mass, resembling a brown-paper parcel--were revealed. My eyes met
Nugent's, and we both laughed, he unwillingly, I with helpless
realization of my appearance.

“I am not fit to get into anything better than a pigstye or a
donkey-cart," I said apologetically. “I really am ashamed of myself from
every point of view, moral and physical."

“But what on earth have you been doing?" he asked, as we turned and
drove towards Durrus. “Have you been out snipe-shooting in the bog with
Willy?"

“No," I answered cheerfully; “something much more vulgar."

“It certainly does look more as if you and he had been digging potatoes,
but I did not quite like to suggest that."

Something in his manner offended me.

“That was just it," I said, not choosing to explain. “Willy is rather
short of farm hands just now, and I have had my first lesson in
'sticking' potatoes."

“I should think you will find that a useful accomplishment in Boston."

“Knowledge is power," I said combatively. “Probably the next time you
see me, I shall be learning to sell pigs in the fair at Moycullen."

“Very likely. I believe Americans--I beg your pardon, I mean people from
America--like to do a country thoroughly when they get there. I suppose
you go in for experiments as much as the others?"

“Why, certainly! I guess that's why I came over here; I'm
experimentalizing all the time."

“Really!" said Nugent, without appearing to notice my elaborate
Americanisms. “And is your experiment successful so far?" He looked me
full in the face as he spoke.

“Yes, so far," I answered, with an unexplainable feeling that sincerity
was required of me, and noting inwardly the blue impenetrability of his
eyes.

He said nothing for a minute or two; then, without any apparent
connection of ideas--

“Is Willy corning home to hear us play?" he asked. “Have you taught him
to appreciate high-class music yet?"

“I don't think he wants any teaching," I said, with an instinctive wish
to stand up for my cousin; “he has a wonderful ear, and his taste is
really very good."

“Really!" in an uninterested voice.

“Yes," I said positively; “I believe he has a real talent for music, if
he had only been given a chance."

“He did not get much of a chance at anything, I believe," Nugent said,
in what seemed to me a patronizing way.

“No, he certainly did not. I think very few people know all the
disadvantages he has had, and I am quite sure that very few people would
have done as well as he has if they had been in his place." This with
some warmth.

“I am sure I shouldn't, for one," replied Nugent, quietly taking to
himself the generality which I had thought both telling and impalpable.
“But then, I dare say---- Why, there he is!" interrupting himself, as we
turned into the avenue and came in sight of Willy, who was walking very
fast towards home.

He got out of our way without looking back, and only nodded to us as we
passed. I saw the bowl of eggs in his hand, and knew by the defiant way
in which he carried it that he was ashamed of it.

“Your fellow-labourer seems to have had a peaceful time collecting eggs
whilst you were sticking the potatoes," said Nugent, with again the
suggestion of a sneer. “He certainly does not look as if he had done as
much hard work as you."

“No; he has not run all the way across a field, as I did just now."

Nugent coloured. “I deserved that," he said, and laughed. Then, after a
moment's pause, “And I don't think I did deserve your taking such
trouble to stop me."

“Of course, you may have some inner sense of unworthiness," I answered,
mollified, “that must remain between you and your own conscience; but
it was very rude of me not to have been at home, and I did not mind the
run half so much as writing the letter of apology which I should have
felt you had a right to."

“And which I should not have believed," said Nugent. “It was so wet that
I should have been quite certain that you were sitting over the fire
with Willy all the time, and told Roche to send me away because you felt
as if playing violin accompaniments would be a bore."

“Appearances would have been against me," I admitted; “but I should have
enclosed my boots as circumstantial evidence"--advancing one
disreputable foot from beneath the rug--“and perhaps also one of the
potato-cakes which I had ordered specially for your benefit."

A loud twanging snap from the violin-case under the seat startled us
both.

“By Jove!" exclaimed Nugent; “that is the E string, and I have not
another with me."

“Then we can't have any music," I said, with unaffected dismay. “What a
pity! So I brought you back for nothing, after all."

“Don't say nothing," he said; “think of the potato-cakes!"

“That may be your point of view," I said regretfully; “but when I was
running across that field I was thinking of Corelli."

“I had hoped," remarked Nugent, looking sideways at me, as he pulled up
at the hall door, “that you might have had some incidental thoughts
about the way in which you had treated me."

“I cannot argue any more until I have had my tea," I said, getting out
of the trap, and trying to stamp some of the mud off my boots on the
steps.

“Perhaps I had better go home," he suggested. “As Corelli is out of the
question, I suppose I shall not be wanted."

“Just as you like."

“But I want the potato-cake you promised me."

“Then, I think you had better come in and get it," I said, going into
the house. “I don't approve of outdoor relief."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

PART II.

THE COST OF IT.




CHAPTER I.

MRS. JACKSON-CROLY AT HOME.

    “Fate's a fiddler, life's a dance."

    “O'Rorke's noble feast will ne'er be forgot
     By those who were there, and those who were not."


It was the day of the Jackson-Crolys' dance, for which we had in due
course received our invitations, gorgeously printed on gilt-edged cards.
Willy and I were sitting over the library fire after tea, and had
already begun to contemplate the combined horrors of dressing for a ball
and eating a half-past six o'clock dinner, when Uncle Dominick stalked
in, with a basket in his hand, which he handed to me with a note, saying
austerely that one of the Clashmore servants had just ridden over with
it.

The note was from Connie.

“MY DEAR THEO," it began--I had seen a good deal of the O'Neills lately,
and Connie and I had arrived at calling each other by our Christian
names--“we are sending you over some yellow chrysanthemums, as you said
you were going to wear white. Mamma will, of course, be delighted to
chaperon you, and thinks you had better come here first, and drive on in
our carriage; and we can take you home and put you up for the night, as
Willy may want to stay later than you do. Nugent is, I think, very proud
of the bouquet. He constructed it himself, and has spent the greater
part of the morning over it in the conservatory. Certainly, as far as
wire goes, it is all that can be desired; there are at least ten yards
of that in it."

“I should have thought you might have found some flowers for your cousin
here, Willy," remarked Uncle Dominick, while I was reading the letter to
myself.

“There's nothing fit for any one to wear," answered Willy, gloomily. “I
was out this morning to see, and there was nothing but a few violets."

“I am sorry you did not pick them," I said, with pacific intention; “I
should have been very glad to wear them. They think it would simplify
matters if I slept at Clashmore to-night," I went on. “I think it would
be a good plan, if you don't mind, Uncle Dominick?"

“It is entirely for you to decide, my dear," he said coldly; “you can
make any arrangements that you like. The man is waiting for an answer."

“Well, I will sleep there," I said, goaded to decision by his
ungracious manner.

I accordingly wrote a note to Connie to that effect, and, having sent
it, went up to dress.

With the aid of the ministrations of Maggie, the red-haired housemaid,
who had developed a deep attachment for me, I was arriving at the more
advanced stages of my toilet, when I heard a knock at my door.

“I've got you some violets," said Willy's voice, “but I'm afraid they're
not up to much. I've left them outside."

I heard him run down the passage to his own room, and, opening the door,
I saw a small bunch of violets lying on the ground. I picked them up;
there were very few of them, and they were drenched with rain. Willy
must have been all this time toilsomely searching for them with a
lantern in the dark.

“Has it been raining, Maggie?" I asked.

“'Deed, then, it has, miss, and teeming rain this half-hour."

So he must have gone out in the rain to pick them for me. Poor Willy!

I fastened them into the front of my dress with a sudden ache of pity,
and looked at those other flowers on my dressing-table, the feathery
golden chrysanthemums showing through a mist of maidenhair, with
something that was near being distaste. Their coming had not been
altogether a surprise to me; in fact, I had been more or less looking
out for them all day. But somehow Willy's bunch of violets had taken
away most of my pleasure in them, and when I came downstairs I laid the
bouquet with my wraps, out of sight, on the hall table.

We hurried through our early dinner, but before we left the dining-room
I received a mysterious intimation from Roche to the effect that Mrs.
Rourke would like to see me outside.

Mrs. Rourke was the cook, and, inly marvelling what she could have to
say to me, I went out into the hall. There, to my no small surprise, I
was confronted, not only by Mrs. Rourke, but by the whole strength of
the Durrus indoor establishment. There they all were--housemaid,
dairy-maid, and kitchen-maids, with their barefooted subordinates
lurking behind them, and from them, as I appeared, a low-breathed murmur
of approval arose.

“Well, miss," began Mrs. Rourke, in tones of solemn conviction, “ye
might thravel Ireland this night, and ye wouldn't find yer aiqual! Of
all the young ladies ever I seen, you take the sway!"

“Glory be to God! 'tis thrue!" moaned a kitchen-maid, in awestricken
assent.

“Why, you can't half see her there, Mrs. Rourke," said Willy, coming out
of the dining-room; “hold on till I get a lamp."

He came back with the tall old moderator lamp from the middle of the
dinner-table, and, holding it up, stood so that the light should fall
full on me. Seldom have I felt more foolish than I did at that moment;
but I did my best to live up to the position.

“And what I say, Masther Willy," continued Mrs. Rourke, taking up her
parable in the manner of a prophetess, “is that I never seen a finer
pair than the two of ye, and ye do well to be proud of her! And I hope
it won't be the last time I'll see herself and yourself going out
through that door together--nor coming in through it nayther!"

This dark saying was received by the chorus with various devotional
expressions of satisfaction.

“Yes, Mrs. Rourke," said my uncle's voice from behind me, in tones of
unusual affability, “I think we have no reason to be ashamed of our
representatives."

I was beginning to feel that I could bear this dreadful ceremonial no
longer, when, with sincere inward thanksgiving, I heard the grinding of
wheels on the gravel.

“There is the carriage," I said, turning to Willy, who had all this time
been silently holding up the lamp; “do put down that thing, and get me
my cloak."

My uncle himself put my wraps upon me, and stood with me in the open
doorway while Roche laid a strip of carpet down the wet steps. As I
stood waiting in the doorway, I saw a woman standing in the rain, just
outside the circle of light thrown from the carriage lamps. She pressed
forward a little as I came down the steps, and then drew quickly back
with what sounded like a sob. The momentary gleam of the carriage lights
had shown me who it was.

“Willy," I said, as we drove away, “did you see Anstey Brian standing
there? I am almost sure she was crying. What could have been the matter
with her?"

“You must have made a mistake," he said; “maybe it wasn't Anstey at all.
Anyhow, if she wants to cry, there's no need for her to go and stand out
there in the rain to do it."

He spoke with an annoyance that puzzled me. I was quite certain that I
had seen Anstey; but, remembering that for some reason the subject of
Moll Hourihane and her daughter had always been an unfortunate one with
Willy and my uncle, I said no more.

We had been asked to the Jackson-Crolys' for nine o'clock, but, although
it was not much more than half-past when the Clashmore carriage arrived
at Mount Prospect, several heated couples whom we encountered in the
hall were proof that the dancing had already been going on for some
time. On coming down from the cloak-room, we saw at the foot of the
stairs a small, bald-headed gentleman, moving in an agitated way from
leg to leg, and apparently engaged in alternately putting on and taking
off his gloves.

“That's Mr. Jackson-Croly," whispered Connie, rapidly; “he's an odious
little being! Don't dance with him if you can possibly help it. I always
tell lies to escape him; I lose less self-respect in that way than by
dancing with him."

She had no time to say more, as Madam O'Neill had by this time advanced
upon our host with a benignity of aspect born of the consciousness of a
singularly becoming cap and generally successful toilette. For a moment
I thought he was going to make her a courtesy, so low was his reverence
on shaking hands with her.

“It was so kind of you to come, Madam O'Neill," he said, speaking
through tightly closed teeth in a small, deprecating voice; “and the
weather so unpleasant, too; yes, indeed! But we've quite a nice little
number of friends dancing in there already, and we're expecting another
carful of partners for the young ladies"--with a bow to Connie and
me--“from the bank in Moycullen."

“That will be delightful!" said Connie, with a brilliant smile, giving
me at the same time an expressive pinch.

She was looking very pretty, and was in the highest spirits, consequent,
as I soon found, on an advanced flirtation with a Captain Forster, then
staying at Clashmore. Pending his arrival, however, she condescended to
dance with Mr. Jimmy Barrett, who, his usual red-hot appearance
accentuated by the fact that he was wearing the hunt uniform, had
waylaid us in the hall, and he now carried Connie off, while I followed
the Madam and Mr. Jackson-Croly into the drawing-room. There we were
received by Mrs. Jackson-Croly, imposingly attired in ruby silk and
white lace. Unlike her obsequious spouse, Madam O'Neill's diamonds and
acknowledged social standing had no over-aweing effect upon her, and in
her greeting to us she abated no whit of her usual magnificence of
manner.

“'Twas too bad Miss O'Neill was from home and couldn't come," she
observed condescendingly. “I have lots of gentlemen looking for
partners--quite an 'embrasse de richesses.' There were so many asking
for invitations, and I didn't like refusing. You must let me present
some of them to you, Miss Sarsfield."

The two rooms in which the dancing was going on were brightened by the
red coats of several members of the Moycullen Hunt, and one of these was
presently captured by Mrs. Croly and introduced to me. While I was
putting his name down for a dance, the rest of our party were ushered in
by Mr. Jackson-Croly.

“The Clashmore gentlemen, Louisa, my dear," he announced, with chastened
pride.

The O'Neill soon made his way to me.

“Well, Miss Sarsfield, what are we to have? I see the next is a polka. I
can't manage these new-fashioned waltzes, but I flatter myself I can
dance a polka."

With inward trepidation I consented, and was occupied with the usual
difficulty of refastening my pencil to my card, when card and all were
quietly taken out of my hand.

“Now, Theo, how about those dances you promised me? I'm just going to
put my name down for them"--scribbling away on my card as he spoke.

“Nonsense, Willy; give me back my card at once."

“No fear; not till I've done with it. Well, this will do for a start,"
he said, at length returning me my card, black with his initials, and
departing without giving me time to remonstrate. As he went away, Nugent
came up.

“Can you give me a dance?" he asked. “I am afraid it is not very likely,
after the amount of time Willy has spent over your card. I never saw him
write so much before in his life; he looked as if he were writing a
book."

“Oh, I think I have some left," I said, resolving to do as I thought fit
about Willy's dances.

“Then, may I have 6, 11, 13, and 18, if you are here; and supper?"

“I am afraid I can't give you supper," I said, glancing at the large “W"
scrawled through the four supper extras on my card; “but you can have
the others, I think."

“Thanks; that is very good of you. I think the next thing to be done is
to ask Mrs. Croly for a waltz"--making a survey of the room as he spoke.
“I always do, and she always pretends to strike me with her fan, and
says, 'I suppose you're mistaking me for Sissie,' and is arch. I should
watch if I were you; I am sure you would like to see her looking arch."

I was, unfortunately, not privileged to see this phase of my hostess, as
The O'Neill had already stationed himself beside me, so as not to lose a
bar of his polka.

“Lots of people here to-night, Miss Sarsfield. You must feel as if you
were back in Boston, eh? Ah, there's the music! Let us start while we
have plenty of room."

He danced with the self-assertive vigour peculiar to small fat men, and
we stamped and curvetted round the room in circles so small that I found
it difficult to keep on my feet.

“That wasn't bad," he gasped complacently, as we staggered to a corner
and rested there, while he mopped his purple forehead. “You dance like a
fairy, Miss Sarsfield. But, upon my soul, I think they get more pace on
every year. That woman at the piano--Mrs. What's-her-name? Whelply,
isn't it?--why, she's rattling away as if the devil was after her."

Looking about me, I saw with deep amusement that Willy had selected Miss
Mimi Burke as his partner, and was charging with her through the throng
at reckless speed. Her face, blazing with heat and excitement, showed no
unworthy fears for her own safety; and as, with her chin embedded in
Willy's shoulder, they sped past, she cast an eye of exhilarated
recognition at me.

“By Jove!" wheezed O'Neill, still breathless from his exertions; “old
Mimi's got a wonderful kick in her gallop still. She's getting over the
ground like a three-year-old!"

To me the appearance of my cousin and his partner was more suggestive of
a large steamer going full speed through smaller craft, Miss Mimi's
rubicund face representing the port light; but I kept this brilliant
idea to myself.

“I hope Willy knows how to steer," I said. “He does not take things so
easily as your son appears to do."

Nugent was performing what was only too evidently a duty dance with one
of the Misses Jackson-Croly--a very young lady, with fuzzy hair and a
pink frock. They wound sadly along, as much as possible on the outskirts
of the darting crowd, Nugent's expression of melancholy provoking his
more agile parent to a laugh of mingled contempt and self-complacency.

“Take things easily!" he repeated; “why, he's a regular muff. Who'd ever
think he was a son of mine? If I were dancing with a spicy little girl
like that, I wouldn't look as if I were at my own funeral. Shall we have
another turn?" and before I had time for a counter suggestion we were
again hopping and spinning round the room.

I had no reason to complain of lack of attention on the part of my
hostess, and I and my card were soon in a state of equal confusion. The
generic name of Mrs. Jackson-Croly's “dancing gentlemen" appeared to be
either Beamish or Barrett, and had it not been for Willy's elucidation
of its mysteries, I should have thrown my card away in despair.

“No, not him. That's Long Tom Beamish! It's English Tommy you're
to dance with next. They call him English Tommy because, when his
militia regiment was ordered to Aldershot, he said he was 'the first of
his ancestors that was ever sent on foreign service.'"

Willy's dances with me were, during this earlier part of the evening,
sandwiched with great regularity between those of the clans Beamish and
Barrett, and I found him to be in every way a most satisfactory partner.
He was in a state of radiant amiability, and proved himself of
inestimable value as a chronicler of interesting facts about the
company in general. He was, besides, strong and sure-footed--qualities,
as I had reason to know, not to be despised in an assemblage such as
this. I carried for several days the bruises which I received during my
waltz with English Tommy. It consisted chiefly of a series of short
rushes, of so shattering a nature that I at last ventured to suggest a
less aggressive mode of progression.

“Well," said English Tommy, confidentially, “ye see, I'm trying to bump
Katie! That's Katie"--pointing to a fat girl in blue. “She's my cousin,
and we're for ever fighting."

There seemed at the time nothing very incongruous about this
explanation. There was a hilarious informality about the whole
entertainment that made it unlike any I had ever been at before. Every
one talked and laughed at the full pitch of their lungs. An atmosphere
of utmost intimacy pervaded the assemblage, and Christian names and
strange nicknames were bandied freely about among the groups in the
corners. The music was supplied by volunteers from the ranks of the
chaperons, at the end of each dance the musician receiving a round of
applause, varying in volume according to the energy and power of
endurance displayed. The varieties of style and time thus attained were
almost unimaginable, and were only equalled by the corresponding
vagaries of the dancers, whose trampings and shufflings and runnings
were to me as amazing as they were unexpected.

I could see Madam O'Neill sitting in state at the end of the room,
surrounded by lesser matrons, her boredom only alleviated by the acute
disfavour with which she viewed the revels.

“Do you know where Connie is, my dear?" she said, with pale asperity, as
I came up to her after a dance. “I have not seen her for the last four
dances."

I was well aware that Connie and Captain Forster had long since
established themselves in the conservatory, but Madam O'Neill was too
full of her grievance to give me time to reply.

“I am perfectly horrified at what you must think of all this," she went
on. “Even here I never saw such a noisy, romping set. You know, we are
quite in the backwoods here--all the nice people live at the other end
of the county--and you mustn't take these as specimens of Irish
society."

I was spared the necessity of replying by the appearance of Nugent.

“Nugent, where is Connie?" demanded the Madam again. “It is too bad of
her to make herself so remarkable in a place like this."

“Oh, she's all right; she's with Forster somewhere," he answered, with
the incaution of total indifference. “Here's your host coming to take
you in to supper, and I advise you to avoid the sherry. This is our
dance, No. 11," he said to me. “We had better not lose any more of it."


                            END OF VOL. I.


PART II.

THE COST OF IT.

(Continued.)




CHAPTER II.

SUPPER EXTRAS.

    “All night has the casement jessamine stirred
     To the dancers dancing in tune."

                          “Must you go?
     That cousin here again? He waits outside?"


We were at supper. The chaperons had at length completed their
well-earned repast, and had returned, flushed and loquacious, to the
dancing-room, yielding their places to the hungry throng who had been
waiting outside the door.

The last waltz had been played by Miss Sissie Croly, in good time and
with considerable spirit, an act of coquettish self-abnegation which
elicited many tender reproaches from her forsaken partner. Making the
most of the temporary improvement in the music, Nugent and I had danced
without stopping, until a series of sensational flourishes announced
that the end of the waltz was at hand. After it was over, he had
suggested supper, and we had secured a small table at the end of the
supper-room, from which, in comparative quiet, we could view the doings
of the rest of the company. I was guiltily conscious of the large “W"
scrawled across the supper extras on my card; but a latent rebellion
against my cousin's unauthorized appropriation conspired with a
distinct desire for food to harden my heart. I made up my mind to do
what seemed good to me about one at least of the extras, and dismissed
for the present all further thought of Willy and his possible
grievances.

I found myself possessed of an excellent appetite. Nugent's invention as
a caterer soared above the usual chicken and jelly, and we both made
what, in the land of my birth, would be described as a “square meal."

Meanwhile, the centre table was surrounded by what looked like a
convivial party of lunatics. Miss Burke and Dr. Kelly had set the
example of decorating themselves with the coloured paper caps contained
in the crackers, and the other guests had instantly adopted the idea.
Mob-caps, night-caps, fools'-caps, and sun-bonnets nodded in nightmare
array round the table, Miss Burke's long red face showing to great
advantage beneath a pale-blue, tissue-paper tall hat.

“I feel I have been very remiss in not offering to pull a cracker with
you," said Nugent, “but I am afraid they have all been used up by this
time!"

“Why did I not go in to supper with Dr. Kelly?" I said regretfully. “If
the worst came to the worst, I am sure he would have taken off his own
sun-bonnet and put it on my head!"

“Go in with him next time," suggested Nugent. “He always goes in to
supper two or three times, and works his way each time down the table
like a mowing-machine, leaving nothing behind him. At the masonic ball
in Cork he was heard saying to his sisters, as they were going in to
supper, 'Stuff, ye divils! there's ice!'"

“Quite right, too," I said, beginning upon the tipsy cake which Nugent
had looted for our private consumption. “I always make a point of
stuffing when there is ice. However, I think on the whole I have had
enough of Dr. Kelly for one evening. I have danced once with him, and I
suppose it is because he is at least a foot shorter than I am that he
makes himself about half his height when he is dancing with me. But I
think all small men do that; the taller their partner, the more they
bend their knees."

Nugent laughed. “I have been watching you dancing with all sorts and
conditions of men, and wondering what you thought of them. I also
wondered if you would find them sufficiently amusing to induce you to
stay on till No. 18?" he said, putting his elbows on the table and
looking questioningly at me.

“Oh, I hope so--at least--of course, that depends on your mother," I
answered.

“Should you care to stay? As in that case I think I could manage to
square my mother."

“It would be better not to bother her about it, perhaps--of course, it
might be very pleasant to stay," I answered confusedly.

The way in which he had asked the question had given me a strange
sensation for a moment.

“I dare say it is not any argument, but I shall be very sorry if you
go."

I went on with the buttoning of my gloves without answering.

“For one reason, I should like you to see what it gets like towards the
end."

Nugent's eyes were fixed on mine across the intervening woodcock and
tipsy cake with more inquiry than seemed necessary, but as he finished
speaking a little troop of men came in together for a supplementary
supper, and I forgot everything but my own guilty conscience, as among
them I saw Willy. It was, however, evident that he had not come with any
gluttonous intent, for, after a cursory look round the room over
people's heads, he walked out.

“Did you see Willy?" I said, in a scared whisper.

“Yes, perfectly. He was probably looking for you."

“Oh, I know he was!" I said, beginning to gather up my fan and other
belongings. “I ought to go at once. I am engaged to him for the extras."

“Are you afraid of Willy?" returned Nugent, without taking his elbows
off the table, or making any move.

“No, of course I'm not. But I don't like to throw him over."

“Oh, I see!" he said, still without moving, and regarding me with an
aggravating amusement.

“Well, I am going----" I began, when a hand was laid on my arm.

“I am delighted to hear it," said Connie's voice, “as we want this
table. Get up, Nugent, and give me your chair. Nothing would induce me
to sit at that bear-garden"--indicating the larger table. “What do you
think I heard Miss Donovan say to that little Beamish man--English
Tommy--as I was making my way up here? 'Now, captain, if you say that
again, I'll pelt my plate of jelly at you!' And I haven't the least
doubt that at this moment his shirt-front is covered with it."

“Oh, all right," said Nugent, slowly getting up, “you can have this
table; we were just going. Miss Sarsfield is very anxious to find Willy.
She says she is going to dance all the extras with him."

“Then she is rather late," replied Connie, unconcernedly. “Captain
Forster, go at once and get me some game-pie. Don't tell me there's
none; I couldn't bear it. Well, my dear," she continued, “perhaps you
are not aware that the extras are all over, and No. 12 is going on now?"

“Have you seen Willy anywhere?" I asked, feeling rather than seeing the
sisterly eye of facetious insinuation that Connie directed at her
brother. “I am engaged to him for No. 12."

“At this moment he is dancing with Miss Dennehy," answered Connie, “but
I know he has been looking for you. He has prowled in and out of the
conservatory twenty times."

“He was in here too," said Nugent; “and I think he saw you," he added,
as we walked into the hall. “What would you like to do now? Willy has
evidently thrown you over, and I expect my partner has consoled herself.
I think the safest plan is to hide somewhere till this is over, and, as
13 is ours, we can then emerge, and dance it with blameless composure."

The doors of the conservatory at the end of the hall stood invitingly
open, and a cool, fragrant waft of perfume came through them. Without
further deliberation, we mutely accepted their invitation, and finding,
by the dim, parti-coloured light of Chinese lanterns, that two armchairs
had been placed at the further end, we immediately took possession of
them.

“Occasionally rest is vouchsafed even to the wicked," said Nugent,
leaning back, and picking up my fan, which I had laid on the floor, and
beginning lazily to examine it. “Looking at a ball in the abstract, I
think it involves great weariness and vexation of spirit. Out of
twenty-four dances, there are at most four or five that one really looks
forward to. You are going to stay for No. 18, you know," he added
quietly. “I shall settle that with the Madam."

“Give me my fan, please," I said, taking no notice of this assertion. “I
can see you know just the right way to break it."

He sat up, and, instead of returning it, began slowly to fan me. There
was a brief silence. The rain pattered down on the glass overhead. We
could just hear the music, and the measured stamping of the dancers'
feet.

“Do you know," he said suddenly, “you are curiously different from what
I expected you to be."

“Why? Had you formed any definite idea about me?"

“Not in the least. That was what threw me so out of my reckoning. I
thought I knew pretty well, in a general way, what you were going to be
like; but somehow you have made me reconstruct all my notions."

“If you had only told me in time, I should have tried to be less
inconsiderate. It is so painful to have to give up one's ideas."

“I did not find it so," he said seriously; “on the contrary. I
wonder"--continuing to flap my big black fan to and fro--“if you ever
had a kind of latent ideal--a sort of thing which seems so impossible
that you never try to form any very concrete theory about it? I suppose
it very seldom happens to a man to find that an idea he has only dreamt
about is a real thing after all. Can you imagine what an effect it would
have upon him when he found that he had unexpectedly met his--well, his
ideal?"

He folded up the fan, and looked down at me, waiting for an answer.

“I should imagine he would think himself very clever," I said, feeling
rather nervous.

“No, not clever, I don't think, so much as fortunate; that is to
say"--he drew a short breath--“of course the ideal may have ideas of
her--of its own that the man can't live up to--independent schemes, in
fact; and then--why, then that chap gets left, you know," he ended, with
a change of tone.

As he finished speaking, the far-off banging of the piano ceased. I did
not know how to reply to what he had said, and his way of saying it had
made me feel so shy and bewildered that I sat awkwardly silent until the
dancers came crowding into the conservatory, all in turn exhibiting the
same resentful surprise, as they found the only two chairs occupied.
Willy was not among them, nor did I see him during the ensuing dance,
and, as his late partner was in the room, I could only conclude that he
was sitting out by himself. I began to feel uncomfortable about him, and
half dreaded meeting him again. The dance seemed interminably long. I
kept my eyes fixed on the door to see if he were among the string of
black and red-coated men who wandered partnerless in and out, but could
see no sign of him. I have no doubt that under these circumstances I was
a very uninteresting companion; Nugent was also silent and preoccupied,
and I think we were both glad when the dance was over.

“It is very strange that I do not see Willy anywhere," I said, as we
came out into the hall again.

“Who? Oh! Willy," he said. “Are you still looking for him? Is not that
he coming out of the supper-room?"

It was Willy. I dropped Nugent's arm.

“You will excuse me, won't you?" I said hurriedly. “I want to explain to
him----"

By this time Willy had met us, and looked as if he were going to pass me
by.

“Do you know that this is our dance?" I said, stopping him. “You are not
going to throw me over again, are you?" My heart beat rather fast as I
made this feeble endeavour to carry the war into the enemy's country. He
was looking grey and ill, and I did not think that his pleasant, boyish
face could have taken on such an expression of gloomy coldness.

“Really? Is it? I did not know that I was to have the honour of dancing
with you again," he responded, with a boyish attempt at frigid dignity.

“Of course it is," I said cheerily, though I felt rather alarmed. “Look
at it in black and white."

Willy did not look at the card which I held towards him.

“It doesn't appear that my name being written there makes much
difference," he answered, making a movement as if to pass on.

“Oh, Willy, that isn't fair! You know I danced ever so often with you
before supper, and afterwards I was looking for you everywhere; was I
not, Mr. O'Neill?"--turning for corroboration to Nugent. He, however,
had left me to fight my own battles, and was at a little distance, deep
in conversation with Mr. Dennehy. I saw that, whether verified or not,
my explanations had but little effect upon Willy, and I boldly assumed
the offensive. “You know, I never said that I was going to give you all
those dances that you took."

“Of course you were at perfect liberty to do what you liked about them,"
returned Willy, without looking at me.

“Don't be absurd! You know quite well what I mean, and if you had wanted
to dance with me you might very easily have found me. I was only in the
supper-room."

He said nothing, and just then we heard the first few notes of the next
waltz.

“You will dance this with me, will not you?" I said, thoroughly
unhappy at the turn things were taking. “I am very sorry. I did not
think you would mind. Don't be angry with me, Willy," I ended
impulsively, putting my hand into his arm.

He looked at me almost wildly for a moment; and then, without a word, we
joined the stream of dancers who were returning to the ball-room.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER III.

MR. CROLY'S STUDY.

          “Love the gift, is love the debt."

    “Like bitter accusation, even to death,
     Caught up the whole of love, and uttered it."


Mrs. Jackson-Croly's party had reached its climax of success.

“The supper's put great heart into them," little Dr. Kelly remarked
confidentially to Willy, as he passed us, leading a stout elderly matron
forth to the dance. The chaperons, with but few exceptions, had
abandoned the hard chairs and narrow sofas on which they had hitherto
huddled in chilly discomfort, and were, again to quote Dr. Kelly,
“footing it with the best of them."

Mrs. Croly herself was playing “Sweethearts," and by way, as I suppose,
of receiving this favour with proper enthusiasm, the guests, as they
danced, sang the words of the refrain--

    “Oh, lo--ove for a year,
     A we--eek, a day,"

as often as it recurred, Mrs. Croly from the piano lending her powerful
aid to swell the chorus. Madam O'Neill was sitting alone upon her sofa,
and had closed her eyes during this later development of the
entertainment, whether in real or simulated slumber I did not know; but
an expressive glance from Connie, whom, to my surprise, I saw circling
in the arms of our host, told me that the latter was more probably the
case. The O'Neill I had lately espied sitting in an armchair on the
landing of the stairs with a very pretty young lady, the instructress
of the younger Misses Jackson-Croly. He, at all events, was enjoying
himself, and as far as he was concerned I felt none of the qualms of
conscience at the lateness of the hour which assailed me at sight of my
chaperon's tired face.

Willy had not spoken since we had begun to dance, but I thought it best
to behave as if nothing were the matter.

“This is the most amusing dance I ever was at in my life," I said, in
the first pause that we made.

“I don't see much difference between it and any other."

“I do not mean to say that I have not enjoyed myself," I said, anxious
to avoid any semblance of superiority, “but you must admit that one does
not usually meet people who are able to sing and dance a waltz at the
same time."

At this point there came a sudden thud on the floor, followed by a
slight commotion.

“Hullo! Croly's let Connie down!" exclaimed Willy, forgetting for an
instant his offended dignity.

I was just in time to catch between the dancers a glimpse of Connie
struggling, hot and angry, to her feet, while her partner lay prone on
his back on the floor. The catastrophe had taken place just in front of
Madam O'Neill, whose eyes, now wide open, were bent in a gaze of
petrified indignation on Mr. Jackson-Croly. Nugent had not been dancing,
and, on seeing Connie fall, had gone round to pick her up, and now made
his way towards me.

“Did you see them come down?" he said. “Croly hung on to Connie like a
drowning man to a straw, and Connie, not being exactly a straw, nearly
drove his head into the floor. She won't speak to him now, which is
rather hard luck, considering she all but killed him. Was I not right in
advising you to stay on till the end?"

Exceeding laughter had deprived me of all power of speech, but, in any
case, Willy did not give me time to reply.

“Come out of this," he said roughly; “I'm sick of it." He gave me his
arm as he spoke, and elbowed his way past Nugent out of the room. He
walked without speaking through the hall towards the conservatory, but
stopped short at the door. “It's full of people in there. Croly's
study's the only place where you've a chance of being let alone," he
said, turning down a passage, and leading the way into a dreary little
room, lighted by a smoky paraffin-lamp, and pervaded by the odour of
whiskey. On the inky table, two or three tumblers with spoons in them,
and a bottle and decanter, were standing in shining patches of spilt
whiskey and water. A few office chairs were drawn up in front of the
remains of a smouldering turf fire. Long files of bills hung beside an
old coat on some pegs, and Mr. Croly's cloth slippers showed modestly
from under a small horse-hair sofa. A more untempting place to sit in
could not well be imagined; but Willy did not seem to notice its
discomforts. He sat down on one of the chairs, and began aimlessly to
poke the fire; while I, gingerly drawing my skirts together, established
myself on the sofa.

“I can't say I think this is an improvement on the conservatory," I said
at length, seeing that Willy did not seem inclined to talk. “When did
you discover it?"

He threw down the poker, and, standing up, began to examine a specimen
of ore that lay on the chimney-piece.

“If you want to know particularly," he said, in a hard and would-be
indifferent voice, “I came and sat in here by myself while those extras
were going on."

“That wasn't a very cheerful thing to do."

“Well, I didn't feel very cheerful," he answered, still with his back to
me, and beginning to scrape the marble mantelshelf with the piece of ore
which he held in his hand.

“Some one appears to have found a certain solace here," I said, looking
at the whiskey and water. “I am sure poor Mr. Croly has crept in from
time to time, and put on his old coat and slippers, and tried to forget
that there was a dance going on in his house."

No answer from Willy.

“Then perhaps it was you," I continued, with ill-assumed levity. “I am
sorry to think that you have taken to such evil courses."

He went on hammering at the chimney-piece without replying.

“It's very rude of you not to answer; and you are ruining Mr. Croly's
mantelpiece."

He put down the piece of ore suddenly, and, leaving the fireplace, came
and stood over me.

“Theo!" he said, in a breathless sort of way, and stopped. I looked up
at him with quick alarm, and saw that he was trying to get mastery
enough over himself to speak. “Don't look at me like that," he said,
almost in a whisper. “I'm nearly mad as it is. I can't bear it any
longer; I must say it."

“Don't, Willy," I said; “please don't. It would be better for us both if
you didn't."

“I don't care," he said, kneeling down beside me, and taking hold of
both my hands. “You've got to listen to me now. You needn't think that I
don't know I haven't a chance. I've seen that plain enough to-night, if
I didn't know it before. Oh, I know, Theo; I know very well," he ended
brokenly.

I could find nothing to say. I liked him so much that I could not bring
myself to frame the bitter truth which he would have to hear. I suppose
my silence encouraged him, for in the same breathless, abrupt way he
went on.

“I know I'm an ignorant brute; but if you would only just try me. Oh,
Theo, if you could only know! I'm such a fool I can't get hold of the
right words to tell you, but you might believe me all the same. Indeed I
do love you--I love you," he repeated, with a sort of sob, gathering
both my hands into one of his and kissing them passionately.

“Willy," I said despairingly, trying to free my hands from his grasp,
“you must stop; you make me miserable. I can't bear to hear you talk
like that. You know how much I like you and respect you, and everything.
I am fonder of you than any one I know almost, but not in that way."

“But if you were fond of me at all, I wouldn't mind how little you liked
me at first, if you'd let me care for you. Maybe, it would come to you
afterwards; and you know the governor would like it awfully," said the
poor boy, lifting his white face, and gazing at me with desperate eyes.

“It's no use, Willy; I can't let you say any more about it. I'm not
worth your caring for me like that," I said unsteadily.

His hands relaxed their grasp, and, drawing mine away, I stood up. He
got up also, and stood facing me in the smoky light of the lamp. He
leaned his hand on the table beside him, and a little ringing of the
spoons and glasses told me how it trembled. When he next spoke, however,
his voice was firmer.

“That's no answer. You're worth more to me than everything in the world.
If it was only that"--with a shaky laugh--“but I know that's not your
reason. Look here--will you tell me one thing?"--coming closer, and
staring hard at me. “Is it another fellow? Is it--is it Nugent?"

“It is nothing of the kind," I said angrily, but at the same time
flushing hotly under his scrutiny. “You have no right to say such
things. If I had never seen him, I should feel just the same towards
you."

I turned to take my bouquet from the sofa with the intention of leaving
the room, but before I could do so, Willy snatched it up, and, taking a
stride forward, he flung the flowers into the fire, and crushed them
with his foot into the burning embers.

“How dare you, Willy!" I said, thoroughly roused. “What right had you to
do that?"

“And what right have you to say you don't care for him, when you carry
his cursed flowers in your hand? I see how the land lies well enough.
I've been made a fool of all through!"

“You have not been made a fool of," I said, with equal energy. “It is
cruel of you to say that."

“Cruel? It comes well from you to say that! I dare say you think it
doesn't matter much; but maybe some day, when I've gone to the devil,
you'll be sorry."

He walked to the door, as if to go.

“I am sorry, Willy," I said, the tears rushing to my eyes. “Don't go
away like that. Oh, why did I ever come to Durrus?"

He stood irresolute for a moment, with the handle of the door in his
hand, looking at me as if in a daze. Then, with an inarticulate
exclamation, he came back to where I was standing, and, before I had
time to stop him, took me in his arms. I was too much unstrung and
exhausted by what had gone before to resist, and I stood in a kind of
horror of passive endurance while he kissed me over and over again. He
let me go at last.

“It's no use," he said, in a choked voice, which sounded almost like a
groan; “it's no use. My God! I can't bear it!" His eye fell on the bunch
of violets in my dress. “Give them to me," he said.

I silently took out of my dress the bunch he had given me, and handed
them, all limp and faded, to him. He took them without looking at me,
and, turning his back to me, walked to the chimney-piece. He leaned both
his arms upon the narrow shelf, and laid his head upon them.

When I left the room, he was still standing motionless in the same
position.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IV.

MYROSS CHURCHYARD.

                    “O fair, large day!
     The unpractised sense brings heavings from a sea of life too broad."

    “Such seemed the whisper at my side.
    'What is it thou knowest, sweet voice?' I cried.
    'A hidden hope,' the voice replied."


The old graveyard on the promontory was at most times the forlornest and
least frequented spot about Durrus. The dead people who lay in crowded
slumber within the narrow limits of the grey, briar-covered walls seldom
heard any disturbing human voice to remind them of the life they had
left. Their solitude was ensured to them by the greater solitude of the
sea, which on three sides surrounded them, and by the dreary strip of
worn-out turf bog which formed their only link with the rest of the
world. There was nothing to mark for them the passing of time, except
the creeping of the shadow thrown dial-wise by the gable of the
broken-down chapel, or the ever-increasing moaning in the caves beneath,
which told of the yearly encroachments of the sea.

Between the verge of the cliff and the wall of the graveyard was only a
little space, along which the sheep had worn themselves a track among
the thickly lying shells and débris, flung up by the waves during
autumn storms. I had wandered round this narrow path, holding with a
careful hand to the wall as I went; and now had clambered on to it, and,
with Pat seated in my lap and Jinny on the tail of my gown, I was
watching the quick dives and casual reappearances of the slim black
cormorants in the sunlit water beneath me. The murmur of the sea,
lightly lipping the rocks, and an occasional bleat from the sheep in the
graveyard behind me, were the only definite sounds I heard, and the soft
wind that rustled in my ears in little gusts seemed the expression of
the pervading stillness.

This delicate breezy morning was the first of the new year. Yesterday's
sunset had been a wild one; it had gleamed angrily and fitfully before
me through packs of jagged cloud while I drove home from Clashmore, and
my heart had sunk low as I watched the outlines of Durrus growing darker
against it. But that was already a thing of last year. The long
uneventful darkness had made everything new, and on this first of
January the sunshine was lying purely and dreamily on sea and bog, and
was even giving something like warmth to the head-stones, whose worn
“Anno Dominis" were since yesterday more remote by a year.

It was a desire for this freedom and freshness which had driven me out
of the house on this, the second morning after the dance at Mount
Prospect. When I came back to Durrus the evening before, I had found the
house empty and desolate. Willy was not there; he had gone to Cork,
Uncle Dominick had told me, looking at me, as he spoke, with a
questioning glance that showed me his anxiety to know if I could account
for this unexpected move.

All the morning at Clashmore, the thought of the inevitable meeting with
Willy had hung over me. It had made me absent during a lesson at
billiards, and stupid in a violin accompaniment; and, combining with
the guilt which I felt at enjoying myself, as, in spite of what had
happened, I could not help doing, it had made me unnecessarily and
awkwardly determined in refusing several invitations to stay on. As I
sat beside Nugent in the dog-cart on the way home, and felt that every
step of the horse was bringing me nearer to Willy, I had become silent
in the attempt to nerve myself for the dreaded first few minutes. If I
could struggle through them creditably, things might not afterwards be
so bad. I think Nugent must have seen that something was troubling me.
Having told me that he was afraid I was very much done up by the dance,
he had considerately left me to myself, and scarcely spoke until we were
at the Durrus hall door--an act of thoughtfulness for which I could
almost have thanked him. He refused my invitation to come in to tea--an
invitation so faintly given that he could hardly have accepted it--but
asked if he might come over some other afternoon, perhaps the day after
to-morrow, and with an excuse for not coming in, which he had obviously
fabricated to help me out of the difficulty, he had driven away.

My first question to Roche as the hall door closed behind me, was to
know where Willy was. He was away; he had gone to Cork the day after the
dance, and it was uncertain when he would be at home. Then, I might have
stayed at Clashmore after all--that, I am afraid, was my first thought;
and then came the feeling of blank collapse, the blending of relief and
disappointment, which is the usual result of needless mental strain. I
had for an instant an insane desire to run down the avenue after the
dog-cart, and say that I would go back to Clashmore; that there was no
reason now---- I laughed drearily to myself as I took off my wraps. What
would Nugent have said when I had overtaken him with such an excuse? It
amused me to think of it; but yet, I thought, I should have liked to
have known.

The restlessness of over-fatigue and excitement was upon me. I did not
know how to endure the long dull dinner, and the solitary evening which
followed it. I tried to play the piano, but the tunes of the waltzes of
the night before still rang in my ears, and the unresponsive silence of
the room as I ceased was too daunting to be faced a second time. Between
my eyes and the columns of the newspaper came a vision of Mr. Croly's
dark little room, and my tired brain kept continually framing sentences
which might have averted all that had taken place there. I could not
even think connectedly, and finally went to bed, as lonely and miserable
as I have ever felt in my life.

In the morning my thoughts had confusedly shaped themselves into one
problem. Would it be possible to go on staying at Durrus? Half the
morning had slipped away, and I had still found no answer to the
question. My head ached, and I felt I could come to no decision until I
was, for the present at least, out of the depressing atmosphere of the
house.

I put the perplexing subject away from me in my half-hour's walk across
the bog, and thought of the dogs, the seagulls, the patches of white
cloud and blue sky that seemed so out of place reflected in the black
pools by the side of the road--of anything, in fact, rather than the
difficulty which was troubling me. I thought that when I got to the
edge of the cliffs, with nothing but the open sea before me, I should be
able to take a steadier view of the whole position.

But I had been sitting in perfect tranquillity for half an hour, and yet
no inspiration had been brought to me on the breath of the west wind
that was coming softly over the sea from America. “I suppose I ought to
go back to Aunt Jane," was my last, as it had been my first, thought;
“but it will be very hard to have to leave Ireland. Besides, if I go
away now, Willy will think that I am going out of kindness to him, and I
could not bear that."

Here Pat, who had found the distant observation of the cormorants a very
tantalizing amusement, looked up in my face with a whimpering sigh, and
curled himself up with his head on my arm and his back to the sea. As I
stooped over and kissed his little white and tan head, a crowd of
insistent memories rushed into my mind. In every one Willy's was the
leading figure; his look, his laugh, his voice pervaded them all, but
with a new meaning that made pathos of the pleasantest of them. I
wondered, with perhaps a little insincerity, why I had not liked him as
well as he liked me. He had said that, if I were to try, I might some
day; but though I should have been glad for his sake to believe it,
every feeling in me rose in sudden revolt at the idea with a violence
that astonished myself. “We shall never have any good times again," I
thought. “I suppose he is miserable now, and it is all my fault. Oh,
Willy! I never meant to be unkind to you." I ended, almost aloud, and
the bright reaches of sea quivered and dazzled in my eyes as the
painful tears gathered and fell.

I have always found that tears rather intensify a trouble than lessen
it, and they now gave such keen reality to what I was feeling that I
could bear the pressure of my thoughts no longer. I got up quickly to go
home, and as I turned I saw a string of three or four boats heading for
the little strand at the foot of the cliff, just below where I was
standing. They were the cumbrous rowing-boats generally used for
carrying turf, and came heavily on through the bright restless water,
loaded, as well as I could see, with men and women.

The pounding and creaking of the clumsy oars in the rowlocks grew
louder; I was soon able to make out that the long dark object, round
which several figures were clustered in the leading boat, was a coffin,
and I now remembered Willy's having told me that this little cove was
called “Tra-na-morruf," the strand of the dead, from the fact that it
was the landing-place for such funerals as came by boat to the old
burying-place. The people were quite silent as the boats slowly advanced
to the shore; but directly the keel of the first touched on the shingle,
the women in the others raised a sustained, penetrating wail, which
vibrated in the sunny air, and made me shiver in involuntary sympathy.

I thought I had never heard so terrible a cry. I had often been told of
the Irish custom of “keening" at funerals, but I was not prepared for
anything so barbaric and so despairing. It broke out with increasing
volume and intensity while the coffin was being lifted from the boat and
was toilfully carried up the steep path in the cliff, the women clapping
their hands and beating their breasts, their chant rising and swelling
like the howl of the wind on a wild night. The small procession halted
at the top of the cliff, and another set of bearers took the coffin, and
carried it with staggering steps across the irregular mounds of the
graveyard, to where, behind the ruined chapel, I now noticed, for the
first time, an open grave. The dark crowd closed in round it, and, after
a few stifled sobs and exclamations, I heard nothing but the shovelling
of the earth upon the coffin.

It was soon over. The throng of heavily cloaked women and frieze-coated
men opened out, and I saw the long mound of brown earth, with a couple
of women and a man kneeling beside it. The rest, for the most part, made
their way down the cliff to the strand, from which a clatter of
conversation soon ascended. About half a dozen of the women, however,
remained behind; each sought out some special grave, and, kneeling
there, began to tell her beads and pray with seemingly deep devotion.

I moved away from where I had been standing, with the intention of going
home, but stopped at the gateway to look again at the effect of the
black figures dotted about among the grey stones, with their background
of pale blue sky. Near the gate was the ugly squat mausoleum in which
lay many generations of Sarsfields, and as I passed through the gate I
saw, kneeling at the farther side of it, a mourner dressed like the
others in a hooded blue cloak. She was clapping her hands and beating
her breast as if keening, but she made no sound. A country woman at this
moment passed me, curtseying as she did so, and, feeling a natural
curiosity to know who had taken upon herself the office of bewailing my
ancestors, I said--

“Can you tell me who that woman at the Sarsfield tomb is?"

“Faith, then, I can, your honour, miss! But sure yourself should know
her as well as me. 'Tis Moll Hourihane, that lives below at the lodge of
the big house."

“Oh yes, of course, so it is," I said, recognizing her as I spoke; “but
what has she come here for?"

“Throth, I dunno, miss. But there's never a buryin' here that she's not
at it, and that's the spot where she'll always post herself. Sure she's
idiotty-like; she thinks she's keening there, and the divil a screech
out of her, good or bad, all the time."

My informant gave a short laugh. She was a tall, handsome woman, with a
strong Spanish type of face and daring black eyes, and she had a grimly
humorous manner which interested and amused me.

“Why does she pick out the Durrus tomb?" I asked, as much to continue
the conversation as for any other reason.

“Glory be to God, miss! How would I know?"--darting at me, however, a
look of extreme intelligence, combined with speculation as to the extent
of my ignorance. “'Twas she laid out the owld masther afther he dying,
whativer--yis, an' young Mrs. Dominick too. Though, fegs! the sayin' is,
she cried more for her whin she was alive than whin she was dead."

We were walking slowly along the uneven bog road towards Durrus, my
companion trudging sociably beside me, with her hood thrown back from
her coarse black hair.

“What do you mean?" I said, hoping to hear at last something of the
origin of Moll's madness.

“There's many a wan would cry if they got the turn out," she responded
oracularly.

“Why, what was she turned out of?" I asked.

“Out of the big house, sure! 'Twas there she was till the young
misthriss came."

“I suppose she was a servant there?"

She gave a loud laugh. “Och! 'twasn't thrusting to being a servant at
all she was! Mr. Dominick got her wan time to tend the owld masther that
was sick three years before he died, and the like o' that; and 'twas
there she stayed till Mr. Dominick got marri'd, and then, faith, she had
to quit."

I was rather puzzled.

“I suppose Mrs. Sarsfield liked to choose her servants for herself."

The woman gave a derisive snort. “It 'ud be a quare thing if she'd
choose her whatever!" she said. “Annyway, she never came next or nigh
the house till after Mrs. Dominick dyin', and thin she was took back to
mind the owld masther and Masther Willy."

“But I thought she was weak in her head?"

“Och! the divil a fear! She was as cute as a pet fox till the winther
the owld masther died; but whativer came agin her thin I don't rightly
know. 'Twas about the time she marri'd owld Michael Brian it began with
her. She looked cliver enough; but the spaych mostly wint from her, and
she was a year that way." Here she looked behind her, and crossed
herself with a start. “The saints be about us!" she exclaimed, in a
whisper; “look at herself follying us!"

I also turned, and saw Moll Hourihane close behind. She was walking on
the strip of grass by the side of the road, and, without looking at us,
she passed by, moving with a sliding shuffle, which I can only compare
to the rolling action of an elephant. She shambled along in front of us
until she came near the gate in the Durrus avenue, when, turning aside
into the bog, she made her way across it to a large black pit filled
with water, apparently one of the many deep holes from which turf had
once been dug. Having wandered once or twice round its shelving, ragged
edges--perilously near them, it seemed to me--she knelt down at its
verge, and, folding her hands on her breast, as she had done on the
first night I had seen her, she remained there without moving.

“Look at her now," said my companion, superstitiously, “saying her
prayers there down by Poul-na-coppal, as if 'twas before the althar she
was. Faith, whin she had her sinses she wasn't so great at her
prayers!"

“I don't think it is very safe to let her go to a place like that," I
said. “I suppose that hole is deep enough to drown her."

“Is it Poul-na-coppal? Shure, it's the greatest shwallow-hole in the
country! Shure, wasn't it there a fine young horse fell down in it wan
time, and they niver seen the sight of him agin? There's no bottom in
it, only mud. Throth, if she got in there, she'd be bound to stay there;
and 'twould be a good job too--God forgive me for sayin' such a thing!"

“Don't you think we ought to try and get her away from there?" I said,
still watching Moll with a kind of fascination, as she rocked herself to
and fro close to the edge.

“Wisha, thin, I'd be in dhread to near her at all. Shure, there's times
when she wouldn't be said nor led by her own daughther."

“It was after Anstey was born that she went completely out of her mind,
was it not?" I said, as we walked on.

“Well, 'twas thin the sinse left her entirely, miss; but she wasn't all
out right in her head, as I'm tellin' ye, for a year before that. There
was a big snow came afther the little gerr'l was born, and they say,
whin she seen that she let one bawl out of her, and niver spoke a word
afther."

We had by this time come to the little gate that led out of the bog.

“Good evening to your honour, miss. May the Lord comfort your honour
long, and that I may niver die till I see you well married; for you're a
fine young lady, God bless you!"--with which comprehensive benediction,
Mary Minnahane, as I afterwards found was her name, tramped off down
the avenue.

I felt lonelier for the cessation of her rough, vigorous voice; and,
turning, I leaned on the gate, and looked back over the sunshiny
bleakness of the bog. It looked now very much as it had looked on the
day when I had gone out to see Willy put Alaska through her paces, and
as the fragrant wind brought the sea murmurs to me, I almost cheated
myself into the belief that this was still that brilliant October
afternoon, and that Willy was now riding down to meet me at the lodge.

My eyes fell on the solitary figure at the bog hole. It recalled in a
moment the funeral, the graveyard, my futile tears, and all that had led
to them. I turned towards home with the same feeling of uncertainty and
dejection with which I had set out.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER V.

ENTER WILLY.

    “Oh, the little more, and how much it is!
     And the little less, and what worlds away!"

      “Love with bent brows went by,
    And with a flying finger swept my lips."


“No news from Willy? I thought you would have been sure to have heard
from him."

“No, Uncle Dominick; he never even told me he was going," I replied,
with a full consciousness of the emphasis laid on the “you."

“Really! How very strange! I thought Master Willy seldom did anything
nowadays without consulting a certain young lady."

I went on with my lunch without speaking. These pleasantries on my
uncle's part were not uncommon, and, as there was no mistaking whither
they all tended, I hated and dreaded them more every day. In this
particular instance, I believed I saw very plainly a real anxiety to
find out the state of affairs between Willy and me, and I thought it
best to hold my tongue. My silence did not discourage Uncle Dominick.

“I forgot to tell you last night that I met Miss Burke yesterday," he
said. “She gave me a great deal of news about the ball, and told me that
every one said that you and Willy were 'the handsomest couple in the
room.' I told her that as far as one of you was concerned I could well
believe it; and, indeed, Willy is not such a bad-looking fellow, after
all, eh?"

“I think Miss Burke herself and Willy were a much more striking pair," I
answered, evading the question, and anxious to show him that I disliked
the way in which I was for ever bracketed with Willy. “Oh, by the way,
Uncle Dominick," I went on, regardless of a conviction that I was saying
the wrong thing, “I heard from Mr. O'Neill this morning. He says that he
is coming over here this afternoon, to fetch some music which he left
here the other day."

Uncle Dominick gave me a sharp look from under his bushy eyebrows. It
was one of those unguarded glances which, for the moment, strip the face
of all conventional disguises, and lay bare all that is hidden of
suspicion and surmise. I noticed suddenly how bloodshot his eyes were,
and how very pale he was looking. There was dead silence. By way of
appearing unconscious and indifferent, I took out of my pocket Nugent's
letter, and began to read it; but I felt in every fibre that my uncle
was watching me, and a maddening blush slowly mounted to my forehead,
and spread itself even to the tips of my ears. Uncle Dominick cleared
his throat with ominous severity, and pushed back his chair from the
table.

“At what hour do you expect Mr. O'Neill?"

If he had asked me at what time in the afternoon I contemplated
committing a burglary, he could not have spoken with a more concentrated
disapproval.

“I have not the least idea," I said, getting up with as much dignity as
I could muster. “I suppose about the time people usually come."

“H'm! I suppose one cannot expect young ladies to be very lucid in
their statements about such matters," he replied, with a singularly
unpleasant smile.

“I suppose not," I retorted obstinately.

“Well, I suppose one must only expect him when he comes," said my uncle,
with a return of suavity, as distasteful to me as his former manner. I
called the dogs away from their assiduous polishing of the plates on
which they had had their dinners, and left him to finish his wine alone.

“How detestable he can be when he likes!" I thought, seating myself
before the drawing-room fire. “I wonder why he dislikes Nugent so much?
I don't suppose it can be on account of Willy; after all, there is
really no reason for that." My cheeks were still hot, and I put my hands
over them, looking through my fingers into the fire. “If Uncle Dominick
is going to make himself unpleasant in this kind of way, I shall have to
go back to America, no matter what Willy thinks about it."

My ideas as to leaving Durrus were still as hazy as they had been
yesterday morning at the old graveyard, and this was a fresh
complication. I had, however, made up my mind on one point--until I saw
Willy again, I would settle nothing. That was at least definite; and so
was the fact which at this moment occurred to me--that I should break
down in one of the more difficult of the violin accompaniments if I did
not practise it before Nugent came. I gave the fire an impatient poke,
and, mentally throwing my reflections into it, went over to the piano.

I had said to my uncle that I supposed Nugent would come at the usual
time, but I was forced to the conclusion that his views on the subject
differed from those of most people. Teatime came, and, after waiting
till the tea was becoming bitter, and the buttered toast half congealed,
I partook of it in solitude. I began to wonder if it were possible that
he could have made a mistake about the day, and again taking out his
letter, I read it over. The clear, forcible handwriting was not that of
a person who made mistakes, and it set forth plainly the fact that on
this afternoon the writer intended to come and see me, and would come as
early as he could. The sprawling minute-hand of the ormolu clock was now
well on its way towards half-past five; something must have happened to
prevent him from coming, unless, indeed, he had forgotten all about it.
I did not think it likely that he would forget, but the possibility was
not a pleasant one. I sat in the cheery light of the fire until the
minute-hand had passed the illegibly ornamental figure which marked the
half-hour, and, feeling a good deal more disappointed and put out than I
cared to own to myself, I was going to ring for the lamp and settle down
to a book, when I heard the sound of quick trotting, and the light run
of a dog-cart's wheels on the avenue.

“I know I'm very late," said Nugent, as he shook hands with me, “and I
meant to be very early, but it wasn't my fault. I am sure you are going
to tell me that the tea is cold, but I don't care; I prefer it with the
chill just off."

“Then you will be gratified," I said, pouring it out. “I began to think
you were not coming, and was repenting that I had wasted half an hour in
practising that awful accompaniment of Braham's."

“Did you really do that? It was very good of you. I did my best to get
away early, but I had to stay and see Captain Forster off. I can't say
that he seemed to appreciate the attention, as he was playing billiards
with Connie up to the last minute. I was very sorry afterwards that I
had been such a fool as to lose the whole afternoon on his account."

“I think you might have left him in Connie's hands," I said, sociably
beginning upon a second edition of tea.

“I want to know if you are all right again," said Nugent, looking at me
scrutinizingly. “I thought you seemed awfully played out the day before
yesterday."

“Did I?" I said. “I wasn't in the least--I mean I was very tired, but
that was all."

“You scarcely spoke to me all the way over here. I don't know if you
generally treat people like that when you are very tired."

“No," I said; “when I know people well enough, I am simply cross."

“That means that you don't know me very well."

“No, I don't think I do," I said, with unpremeditated truthfulness. “By
the way, is it true that you are all going away from Clashmore soon? You
said something about it in your letter."

“Yes; I believe they are all off next week," he replied; “but I think I
shall stay on here for a bit. I don't want to go away just now."

I was on the point of saying that I was very glad to hear he was going
to stay, but stopped myself, and said instead that I should have thought
he would find it rather dreary by himself.

“I don't expect I shall," he answered. “I shall ask you to let me come
over here very often. You know, we agreed at Clashmore that you were to
take my music in hand, and teach me to count."

“If I try to do that, we shall certainly have plenty of occupation," I
said, laughing at the prospect with a foolish enjoyment.

“All right, so much the better"--looking at me and laughing too. “By the
way, Connie wants to know if you will ride over to Mount Prospect with
her and me the day after to-morrow, to pay our respects after the
dance."

“I shall be very glad," I answered; “I have not had a ride for a long
time. Should you mind ringing the bell? We shall want the lamps for the
piano."

“I should mind very much," he said, without moving from the substantial
armchair in which he was sitting. “I think it would be a much better
scheme to sit over the fire instead. You were in such an extraordinary
hurry to get away from Clashmore the day before yesterday, that you did
not give me time for more than half the smart things I had prepared to
say about the Jackson-Crolys' dance."

“Very well," I said, dragging out a little old-fashioned, glass-beaded
footstool, and settling myself comfortably with my feet on it in front
of the fire. “You can begin now, and say them all one after the other,
and by the time you have got through I shall have got my smile ready."

“You are very hard upon me. You should remember that my bon-mots are
exceedingly fragile flowers--kind of hothouse exotics--and they require
the most sympathetic attention. You ought to try to encourage native
talent, even if it does not come up to your American standard of
humour."

“I don't know exactly what that is," I replied; “but I assure you that
that dance does not require any embellishments. The only thing needful
in describing it is the solid truth."

“You must not fancy that all our county Cork entertainments are on the
Mount Prospect pattern," he said, a little anxiously. “I dare say you
think we are all savages, but we don't often have a war-dance like
that."

“Well," I said, checking an inclination to sigh as the thought crossed
my mind, “I shall always be glad that I saw at least one before I went
back to America."

He got up and put down his cup; then, drawing his unwieldy chair closer
to me before sitting down, “But you are not thinking of going back to
America?" he said slowly.

“Oh! well, of course I shall have to go back sooner or later," I
replied, as airily as I could. “I do not mean to spend my whole life
here."

“Don't you?" he said, in a low voice, leaning forward and trying to
intercept my eyes, as I looked straight before me into the fire. “I wish
you would tell me if you really mean that."

“I certainly do mean it," I answered, with decision. “And, after all, I
do not see that it much matters whether I do or not."

“Why do you say it doesn't matter?" he said slowly.

“Oh, I don't know," I answered idiotically.

“But I think you ought to know before you make assertions of that kind,"
he persisted. “I dare say there are several people who would think it
mattered a good deal."

He spoke with an intention in his voice that I had never heard before.
My heart gave a startled beat. Did he mean Willy?

“That does not sound at all like what you once said to me. You told me
that I was 'a distinct failure in these parts.' I should like to know
who all these people are who have changed their minds about me," I said,
impelled by a reckless impulse to find out what he had meant.

“Don't you remember my telling you the other night of one person who had
changed his mind? Have you quite forgotten what I said to you then?"

He was very near to me, so near that he must almost have felt my breath
as it quickly came and went. My heart was beating fast enough
now--hurrying along at such speed that I could not be sure enough of my
voice to speak.

“Can you not think of any one to whom it would make a good deal of
difference if you went back to America? Couldn't you?" He hesitated.
“Don't you know it would make all the difference in the world to--to
me?"

His hand found mine, and, as it closed upon it, I felt in one magical
moment that there was but one hand in the world whose touch could send
that strange pang of delight to my heart. His eyes lifted mine to them
in spite of me. I do not know what he read in them, but in his I thought
I saw something quite new--something that made me giddy, and took away
my power of speaking.

“Don't you know it?" he whispered. “Theo!"

With a feeling that I must say something, I answered, scarcely conscious
of what I was saying--

“I do not know. I do not see how it could. We see so little of you.
Perhaps some people might care. I dare say my uncle and Willy would."

Nugent got up abruptly, treading inadvertently on Jinny, who was
sleeping peacefully on the rug. He took no notice of her resentful
shriek, and said, with a sudden change of voice and manner--

“Yes, of course--I forgot; naturally they are the people it would make
most difference to." He stooped and patted Jinny, who was ostentatiously
tending her injured paw. “Did I hurt you, Jinny? Poor little dog!" he
said, as if becoming aware for the first time of his offence. Then,
after a time, “By-the-by, I heard from Barrett that Willy is in Cork.
When do you expect him back?"

Even before he had spoken, I had realized the impression which my
blundering mention of Willy must have given; but, in the shock of the
discovery which I had just made, I hardly cared. Nothing could penetrate
to my brain except one thought that mastered it with bewildering
force--Is it possible that he cares for me? Perhaps he fancied, from
what I said, that the general gossip about Willy and me was true. I
could almost have laughed for pleasure that he should mind so much. I
looked up at him as he stood by the fire, with its light flickering on
his gloomy face, and my self-possession returned to me a little.

“I know absolutely nothing about Willy," I said, with decision. “I have
not seen him since the night of the ball, and I have no idea when he is
coming home."

He came a step nearer, and looked at me dubiously; but there was new
purpose in his voice as he said--

“Then, it is not----"

He stopped at the sound of a footstep outside the door. I recognized it
in an instant.

“Here is Willy!" I gasped, in tones from which I vainly tried to banish
the sudden inward despair which possessed me. The door opened, letting
in a blaze of light, and Willy, followed by Roche with a lamp, came into
the room.

The necessity of the moment gave me a fictitious courage. Pushing back
my chair, I jumped up to meet him with an ease and cordiality intended
to cover his embarrassment and my own.

“So here you are back, Willy! We have been wondering what had become of
you."

He did not look at me as we shook hands, but he answered, in a voice as
successfully friendly as my own--

“I was forced to go up to Cork on business. I thought I could get down
last night, but I couldn't manage it. How are you, Nugent?" he went on
stiffly. “You'll have a pretty wet drive home. It was pouring when I
came in."

Nugent at once took the hint thus broadly given.

“Yes, I dare say I shall," he said coolly. “Would you order my trap,
please?"--turning to Roche, who had not yet left the room. “Good night,
Miss Sarsfield. Does that ride hold good?"

He had taken my hand in his as he said good night, and he still held it
with a strong pressure. Something weighed down my eyelids--I could not
meet his eyes again, and I answered hurriedly--

“Yes--oh yes, I hope so! Good night."




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VI.

THE HAND AT THE GATE.

    “Which do you pity the most of us three?"


Most girls at three and twenty believe that they have explored their own
characters, and know pretty accurately their emotional capabilities.
They have always been taking soundings in their souls, noting eagerly
any signs of increasing depth or of shoaling water; the most trivial
incidents have a local importance and imagined connection. In fact, the
phrase, “Falling in love," implies, in their case, a contradiction of
terms, the various phases of the disorder being accepted by its victims
with scientific recognition.

I think I must have been very deficient in this power of self-analysis.
I had always taken my life as it came, without much introspective
thought of its effect upon me, and on the one or two occasions when I
had been confronted with the necessity for knowing my own mind, I had
never found the need for searchings of heart to discover if the germs of
any unsuspected feeling were hidden there. I had taken for granted that
I must be a hard-headed, hard-hearted person, somewhat probably of Aunt
Jane's type. I used to listen with an amused sympathy to the intricacies
of sentimental detail with which many of my friends recounted their
experiences, and had often offered, not without a certain sense of
superiority, the cold-blooded counsels of common sense.

It was to me the remotest of chances that I should ever be driven to
weigh, as they did, the value of a sentence, a word, or a look; and yet,
nevertheless, now, not three months after I had left America, this was
precisely what I found myself doing.

I awoke, the morning after Nugent's visit, with an unfamiliar feeling of
still gladness. I knew that some strange and delightful thing had
befallen me; but I waited in dreamy security, till this new happiness
that was waiting for me in my waking life should stir me to a clearer
knowledge of itself. Slowly it all came back to me. In imagination I
lived again through what had happened yesterday afternoon. The
unacknowledged anxiety lest he should not come; the relief of hearing
that he was not leaving the country; the incredulous uncertainty as to
his meaning; and then--ah yes! I put my hand over my eyes, dizzy even
at the remembrance of the swift conviction which had taken me with such
sovereign power--then, the certainty that he loved me.

How had it all come about? How was it that, before I well understood
what was happening, my independence had been overthrown? Looking back
over the time I had known him, I could find no reasonable explanation.
Until the night of the Jackson-Crolys' dance I had never admitted to
myself that I did more than like his society, and till then I had had
still less idea that he did more than care for mine.

With a shamefaced smile at my own foolishness, I got out my diary, and
searched through it for some mention of Nugent on the days on which I
remembered to have met him. But its bald and unimaginative record had
chronicled no description of him beyond one pithy entry after the first
day's hunting--

“Mr. O'Neill piloted me. Dull and conceited."

I remembered quite well the satisfaction with which I had permitted
myself this rare expression of opinion; and I laughed outright as I
thought how the girl who had written that would have despised her future
self, if she could have foreseen in what spirit it would again be
referred to. “Dull and conceited!" Had he or I changed most since that
was written? I pondered over it, and came to the conclusion that it was
with him that the change had begun. I should never have altered my
opinion of him, if he had not shown that he had altered his of me.

I slowly thought over the various stages of our acquaintance, ending, as
I had begun, with the events of yesterday. Woven in through all my
reflections had been a little thread of uncertainty and dissatisfaction.
What was the question that had been interrupted by Willy's inopportune
arrival? Could he really have thought I was engaged to my cousin? It
seemed at first as if he had suspected it; but I knew that what I had
said was enough to convince him that he had been mistaken--that I was
sure of, from the way he had said good-bye. Well, I should certainly see
him to-morrow; perhaps even to-day, I thought, and trembled at the
thought.

When I went down to breakfast, I found that Willy had finished his. This
was practically our first tête-à-tête since he had come home. Last
night he had not come into the drawing-room after dinner, and I had gone
to my room early. He was standing in the window, reading a letter, when
I came into the room, and, with a keen dart of memory, my first morning
at Durrus came into my mind. He had been standing in just that position
as I came into breakfast that first morning after my arrival, and I well
remembered the smile with which he had come forward to meet me. The
contrast of his present greeting jarred painfully on me, and dashed a
little the serenity in which I had tried to enwrap myself. The old
boyish friendliness was all gone, and in its place was a spasmodic,
constrained politeness, which was so foreign to his nature, and so
hardly assumed, that it seemed to me the most pitiful thing in the
world. I came near wishing that I had never seen Nugent, and I thought
with humiliation of what Willy would feel when he knew how much my
denials about him had been worth.

“I breakfasted earlier to-day," he said awkwardly. “I have to be in
Moycullen at eleven o'clock. Is there anything I can do for you there?"

“No, thank you. But, Willy"--as he was leaving the room--“that reminds
me, the O'Neills want me to ride with them to Mount Prospect to-morrow.
Could I have Blackthorn?"

“Of course you can," he answered gruffly; “you know you've only to order
the horse when you want him."

“Would you come with us?" I went on timidly.

“No, thanks; I'm very busy about the farm just now."

He opened the door and went away.

I had no heart to eat my breakfast; the tears were in my eyes as I
poured out a cup of tea, and, making no pretence of eating anything,
took it over and sipped it by the fire. All my gladness of the morning
had died out; I could only feel illogically sorry at this utter break
and severance in the old relations between Willy and me. I was still
dawdling over my tea when Roche came in to clear away the
breakfast-things. His professional eye at once detected my unused plate.

“Will I get another egg biled for you, miss? Them's cold."

“No, thank you, Roche. I am not very hungry this morning."

Roche turned a shrewd eye, like a parrot's, upon me.

“Fie, fie, miss! That's no way for a young lady to be. And Masther Willy
wasn't much better than yourself. You have a right to be out this fine
morning, and not sitting that way over the fire."

Roche and I had become great friends. Early in our acquaintance I had
found out that he was the Patrick Roche whose letters had given me my
first impressions of Irish life, and I had often listened with
affectionate patience to his rambling stories of my father's prowess in
all departments of sport. As much to escape from his acute observation
as for any other reason, I left the dining-room, and wandered aimlessly
into the hall.

A whining and scratching outside the door decided me to try what the day
felt like. I wrapped a carriage rug round my shoulders, and, putting on
the deer-stalker cap which Willy had once made over to me, I opened the
hall door, and was at once assaulted by Pat and Jinny. Having exhausted
themselves in ambitious attempts to lick my face by means of
perpendicular leaps at it, they proceeded to explain to me as well as
they could their wish that I should take them to the garden, to hunt,
for the hundredth time, a rabbit which had long set at naught the
best-laid plots for his destruction. I followed them to the old gate--a
structure in itself very characteristic of Durrus--and opened it in the
usual way, by kicking away a stone that had been placed against it, and
by then putting my hand through a hole to reach the latch, whose catch
on the outside had been broken.

I did not feel disposed to-day to help Pat and Jinny in their hunt, by
struggling, as Willy and I had so often done, through the rows of big
wet cabbages, whose crinkled white hearts showed the devastations of the
enemy, and, leaving the dogs to form their own plan of campaign, I
sauntered up and down the path between the lichen-crusted
gooseberry-trees. In spite of Roche's recommendation of the weather, I
thought it a very cheerless morning. There was a bite in the chilly
air, and each time I turned at the end of the walk and faced the gate,
the breeze that met me was sharp and raw.

It was early in January--the deadest time of all the year, I thought,
looking round. Not a sign of spring, no feeling even of the hope of it;
and somehow, in this cold, leaden atmosphere, my own hopes began to lose
half their life. I turned and once more walked towards the gate,
thinking that I would call the dogs from their futile yelpings at the
mouth of the hole to which the rabbit had long since betaken himself,
and would go for a walk. I was not more than half-way down the path,
when I saw a hand put through the hole in the gate. As it felt for the
latch, I quickly recognized its lean pallor; the gate opened, and Uncle
Dominick came into the garden.

“Good morning, my dear," he said. “I thought I saw you going into this
wilderness of ours that we call a kitchen garden, and I followed you in
the hopes of having a little chat."

He was evidently in the best of humours--nothing else could have
accounted for this unwonted desire for society, and, in spite of the
dark rings under his eyes and the yellow sodden look of his skin, he
looked unusually benign and cheerful.

“Perhaps you will take a turn with me round the garden," he continued
affably. “I can see you are not dressed for a longer walk; although I do
not for a moment wish to disparage your costume. Indeed, I do not know
that I have ever seen you wear anything that became you more than that
cap of Willy's."

I turned with him, and we walked slowly round the grass-grown paths
which followed the square of the walls, stooping every now and then to
save our eyes from the unpruned boughs of the apple-trees.

“Dear me! this place is shockingly neglected," my uncle said, twitching
a bramble out of my way with his stick; “in old days it was a very
different affair. My mother used to have four men at work here, and I
remember well when it was the best garden in the country."

We had by this time come to the dilapidated old hothouse, and we both
stood and looked at it for a few seconds. Through the innumerable broken
panes, and under the decaying window-sashes, the branches of a
peach-tree thrust themselves out in every direction, as if breaking
loose from imprisonment.

“Ah, the poor old peach-house!" said Uncle Dominick, digging a weed out
of the path with the heel of his boot--“that was another of my mother's
hobbies. I wish I had the energy and the money to get this whole place
put to rights," he continued, as we walked on again; “but I have neither
the one nor the other. I shall leave all that for Willy to do some day;
for he is fond of the old place. Do you not think so, my dear?"

“I am sure he is," I answered, rather absently; my thoughts had strayed
away to to-morrow's ride.

“I suppose you have seen Willy this morning? Did he seem in better
spirits than he was in last night? I don't know that I ever saw him so
depressed and silent as he was at dinner," said my uncle.

“Did you think so?" I replied guiltily. “I think he seemed all right
this morning."

“I am very glad to hear it. I was quite distressed by his manner;
indeed, latterly I have frequently noticed how variable his spirits have
been."

I did not speak, and Uncle Dominick went on again with a little
hesitation--

“I will confess to you, my dear Theo, that before you came Willy had
been causing me very serious anxiety. You see, this is a lonely place;
the O'Neills are much away from home, and he had no companions of his
own age and station."

“No, I suppose not," I said, considerably puzzled as to the drift of all
this.

My uncle stroked his long moustache several times.

“Well, my dear, you know the old proverb, 'No company, welcome
trumpery;' that, I am sorry to say, is what the danger was with Willy.
It came to my knowledge that he was in the habit of--a--of spending a
great deal of his time in the house of--“--he hummed and hawed, ending
with suppressed vehemence--“in the house of one of my work-people."

I held my breath, with perhaps some presentiment of what was coming.

“Yes," my uncle said, bringing his stick heavily down on the ground; “I
heard, to my amazement and horror, that the attraction for him there was
the daughter, an impudent girl, who was evidently using every means in
her power to entangle him!"

“An impudent girl!" What was it that he had once said about a girl who
had been taken out of her proper place, and had at once began to
presume? In the same instant the answer flashed upon me--Anstey! Of
course, it was she. How had I been so blind?

My uncle was silent for a few moments, and my thoughts raced back to
incidents, unconsidered at the time, but which now recurred, fraught
with a new meaning. I understood it all now--the girl standing in the
niche at the lodge gate; the words which I had overheard at the
plantation; last of all, the figure in the rain at the hall door on the
night of the dance.

“I was delighted to see, after you came, what an influence for good you
at once seemed to exert over him," Uncle Dominick began again. “I cannot
say how grateful to you I have felt. The thought that Willy might be led
on into doing anything to lower the family preyed upon me more than I
can tell you, and it gave me the greatest pleasure to see what his
feelings for you were."

What could I say? Horror at this new complication about Willy, pity for
Anstey, and the knowledge of what my uncle so obviously expected of me,
were pursuing each other through my mind.

“I feared, from his behaviour last night, that there had occurred some
misunderstanding between you." He stood still, and looked at me
interrogatively. “Of course, I do not ask for your confidence in the
matter, but I think you know as well as I do what effect anything
serious of that kind would have on him."

Honesty compelled me to speak. “I ought to have told you before," I
began falteringly, “that I was thinking--I had almost settled that I was
going back to America."

“To America? Impossible!" he exclaimed, in a startled but dictatorial
voice; then, forcing a laugh, “Of course, I know you are a very
independent young lady, but I have belief enough in you to think that
you would not desert your friends."

“I cannot do what you want me to," I said incoherently; “I should be
staying here on false pretences. I must go away."

“Nonsense!" he said impatiently. “I beg your pardon, my dear, but your
ideas of duty appear to me a little peculiar. I think, all things
considered, you could scarcely reconcile it--I will not say with your
conscience, but with your sense of honour--to let Willy ruin his whole
life without stretching out a hand to stop him."

“But I don't know what you mean. You know I would do almost anything for
Willy; but why should I be bound by my 'sense of honour' to stay here?"

I spoke stoutly, but in my inmost soul I dreaded his answer.

“Well," said my uncle, with a disagreeable expression, “I think that
most people would agree with me, that a young lady is bound in honour
not to give such encouragement to a man as will raise hopes that she
does not mean to gratify."

There was truth enough in what he said to make me feel a difficulty in
replying. We had come to the gate, and he opened it for me.

“I do not wish to press you on this subject, my dear, but I am sure
that, after you have thought it over a little, your fairness, as well as
your kind heart, will make you feel the truth of what I have been saying
to you."

That was all he said, but it was enough. I went back to the house,
feeling that, whatever happened, trouble was before me.

Roche met me on the steps with a note on a salver. I knew the
handwriting, and opened it with a pulse quickened by a delightful glow
of confidence and expectancy. I read it through twice over; then,
mechanically replacing it in the envelope, I went up to my own room,
and, throwing myself on my bed, I pressed my face into the pillow and
wished that I were dead.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VII.

“THIS HIDDEN TIDE OF TEARS."

    “Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been."

    “Ah me! my heart, rememberest thou that hour,
     When foolish hope made parting almost bright?
     Hadst thou not then some warning of thy doom?"


The fire in the library was dying out. I had been sitting on the
hearthrug in front of it for some time, with my elbows resting on the
seat of a low armchair, from whose depths Jinny's snores rose with quiet
regularity. The window had been grey with the last of the dull light
when I first sat down there, and, without stirring, I had watched the
grey fading by imperceptible changes from mere blankness into an
absolute darkness, that invaded the room and filled it like a cloud.

The turf fire, with soft noises of subsidence, had sunk lower and lower
in the grate, and, abandoning its effort to light up the heavy lines of
bookshelves, now did little more than edge with a feeble glow the shadow
of the chimney-piece upon the ceiling. A few minutes before, a flicker
had leaped up from the red embers; it had not lasted long, but the
transient glare had made my eyes ache. For two or three seconds
afterwards the blackened fragments of a sheet of note-paper had been
shaken and lifted uncertainly by the thin turf smoke, and they were now
drifting away with it up the chimney. My hand, lying open upon my knee,
still retained the sensation of holding something which had been clasped
tightly in it all the afternoon--the letter which I had just burnt--and
it seemed to me that in my heart there was the same sense of emptiness
and loss.

It had cost me something to burn it, and as the flame crept over the
pages, I had come near snatching it back again. But after all there was
no need to keep it; its contents were not so long nor so intricate, I
thought bitterly, that there was any fear of my forgetting them.


     “DEAR MISS SARSFIELD" (it began),

       “My sister has asked me to tell you that she has been obliged to
     change her plans, and is leaving Clashmore to-morrow instead of
     next week. She desires me to say how sorry she is at having to give
     up the ride to Mount Prospect, and to go away without seeing you.
     She would write herself, but is too much hurried. I fear that I
     must make the same apologies on my own account, as I find that I
     shall have to go to London in a few days, and may possibly not
     return before the summer; and, as I am afraid I shall not be able
     to get over to Durrus, perhaps you will kindly let me say good-bye
     by letter.

                           “Sincerely yours,

                                            “NUGENT O'NEILL."


Nothing could have been more simply put; nothing could have expressed
more incisively the writer's meaning. Even in the first moment of
reading it, I had been at no loss to understand it. In the legitimate
amusement of flirting with “An American girl," he had gone a little
farther than he had intended, and he now lost no time in removing any
undue impression that his words might have made upon her. What was it
that Willy had told me long ago--how long ago?--“He could tell you many
a queer story of a Yankee girl he met at Cannes!"

Possibly he would now be able to add another “queer story of a Yankee
girl" to his repertoire--how, in the course of a most ordinary
flirtation, he had discovered one afternoon that this girl was losing
her head, and how he had been obliged to leave the country so as to
avoid further difficulties.

The last scrap of the letter fluttered upwards out of sight as this
idea, which it had suggested, came into my mind. The intolerable sting
of the thought acted on me like physical pain. I started up, but by the
time I was on my feet I was ashamed of it. “No," I said to myself
vehemently, “he would never do that; I have no right even to think it of
him. And although, I suppose, he has changed his mind now for some
reason or other, I know he was in earnest when he was speaking to me; I
am sure of it. Perhaps he lost his head too--men very often say more
than they intend--and then when he got home he thought better of it, and
felt it was only fair to let me understand as soon as possible that he
meant nothing serious. How could I have been such a fool as to let half
a dozen words upset my peace of mind?" I asked myself desperately.
“Whatever he meant by them, it is no use my thinking about him any more.
I had better begin at once, as he has done, to try and forget it all," I
thought, as I groped my way out of the room; “but just now I feel as if
it would take me all my life."

As I dressed for dinner, I shrank from the prospect of the long
difficult hours that lay between me and the solitude of my own room. But
I think that my powers of further suffering must have been exhausted; a
benumbing weariness was my only sensation as I sat at the dinner-table,
and, looking from my uncle to my cousin, felt, in some far-off way, that
our lives were converging to their point of closest contact, perhaps to
their climax of mutual suffering.

I had not energy to talk, and I occupied myself for the most part in
efforts to keep up the semblance of eating my dinner. Willy went on with
his in a kind of resigned surliness, taking as little notice of me as
was compatible with common politeness. This state of things I should
much have preferred to any open signs of enmity or friendship, if I had
not noticed that my uncle was narrowly observing us, and was even making
various attempts to involve us both in the conversation, which had
hitherto been little more than a monologue upon his part. Beyond an
occasional grunt, Willy did not even try to respond; and as for me,
though I did my best, utter mental and bodily fatigue made the framing
of a sentence too laborious for me.

Several times during the progress of dinner, I found that Roche was
looking at me with anxious interest; and once or twice he came to my
rescue with unexpected tact, by quietly changing my plate as quickly as
possible, so that my uncle should not see how little I had eaten of what
he had sent me.

Dinner was longer, and Uncle Dominick more determinately talkative, than
usual; but at last there came a break in his harangue, and I took
advantage of it to make my escape into the drawing-room. I sat for a
long time over the fire by myself, lying in an armchair without any wish
to move. I felt as if I had sunk to the bottom of a deep sea, whose
waves were rushing and surging over my head, and I wondered dully if
this was what people felt like when they were going to have a bad
illness. My mind kept stupidly repeating one short sentence, “Let me say
good-bye! Let me say good-bye!" They were the last words I had seen of
Nugent's letter as it curled up in the flame of the library fire, and
they now beat to and fro in my brain with sing-song monotony.

I believe I must have dozed, for the noise of the door opening aroused
me with a shivering start. Willy came into the room with a newspaper in
his hand, and, sitting down at the other side of the fire without
speaking to me, began to read it. I fell back in my chair again, waiting
till the striking of ten o'clock should give me a reasonable excuse for
going to bed. The crackling of Willy's newspaper and the sleepy tick of
the clock were the only sounds in the room. I had never before seen
Willy read a newspaper so attentively, and I watched him with languid
interest from under my half-closed eyelids, while he steadily made his
way through it. Now he had turned it inside out, and was reading the
advertisements; certainly it did not take much to amuse him. Could he
have felt, on that day after the dance, as dead to all the things that
used to interest him as I did now?

It was only four evenings ago since I had listened miserably to the
passionate words which I had not been able to prevent him from saying;
he must have forgotten them already, or how else could he sit there with
such stolid composure? If he could recover his equanimity in four days,
perhaps in a week I should have begun to forget that persistent sentence
which still kept pace with my thoughts.

The dining-room door opened and shut with a loud bang, and I heard the
sound of uncertain footsteps crossing the hall. The crackling of the
newspaper ceased, and a sudden rigidity in Willy's attitude showed me
that he was listening. The step paused outside the door, and then, after
some preliminary rattling, the handle was turned. Willy jumped up and
walked quickly to the door, as if with the intention of stopping whoever
was there from coming in. Before he reached it, however, it opened, and
I saw that it was his father whose entrance he had been trying to
prevent.

“It's not worth while your coming in, sir," he said; “Theo's awfully
tired, and she's going to bed."

“Tired! what right has she to be tired?" said my uncle, loudly, coming
into the room as he spoke. He put his hand on Willy's shoulder and
pushed him to one side. “Get out of my way! Why should I not come in if
I like?"

He walked very slowly and deliberately to the fireplace, and stood on
the rug with his back to the fire, swinging a little backwards and
forwards from his toes to his heels. There was some difference in his
manner and appearance which I could not account for. His face was
ghastly white; a scant lock of iron-grey hair hung over his forehead;
and the dark rings I had seen about his eyes in the morning had now
changed to a purplish red.

“And what have you two been doing with yourselves all the evening?
Making the most of your time, Willy, I hope? Perhaps that was why you
tried to keep me out just now?"

He began to laugh at what he had said in a way very unusual with him.

“Theo," Willy said abruptly, interrupting his father's laughter,
“you're looking dead beat; I'll go and light your candle."

“What are you in such a hurry about?" demanded Uncle Dominick, turning
on Willy with unexpected fierceness. “Don't you know it is manners to
wait till you're asked?"

Willy did not answer, but went out into the hall; and I, feeling both
scared and angry, got up with the intention of following him as quickly
as possible.

“Good night, Uncle Dominick," I said icily.

He bent forward and took hold of my arm, leaning his whole weight upon
it.

“Look here," he whispered confidentially; “how has that fellow been
behaving? You haven't forgotten our little talk this morning, eh?"

“I remember it quite well, Good night," I repeated, trying to pull my
arm from his detaining hand, and move away.

The action nearly threw him off his balance; he gave a stagger, and was
in the act of recovering himself by the help of my arm, when Willy came
back with the lighted candle.

“For goodness sake, let her go to bed," he said, striding over to where
we were standing, and looking threateningly at his father.

Uncle Dominick dropped my arm. “What the devil do you mean by
interfering with me, sir?" he said. “Let me tell you that I will not
stand this behaviour on your part any longer! I suppose you think you
can treat your cousin and me as if we were no better than your low
companions? I know where you spent your afternoon to-day. I know what
those infernal people are plotting and scheming for. But I can tell
you, that if they can make a fool of you they shall not make one of me!
This house is mine. And you may tell them from me, that as sure as I am
standing here"--emphasizing each word with a trembling hand, while he
clutched the mantelshelf with the other--“you shall never set foot in
it, or touch one penny of my money, if----"

“Look here!" said Willy, stepping forward between me and his father;
“that's enough; you'd better shut up."

“How dare you speak to me like that? Your conduct is not that of a
gentleman, sir!--not that of a gentleman! I say, sir, it is
not--that--of----" His voice had grown thicker and more unsteady at
every word.

“Here's your candle," said Willy, thrusting the candlestick into my
hand; “you'd better go."

“She shall not be ordered about by you!" thundered my uncle, making an
ineffectual step or two to stop me. “She shall stay here as long as I
like. I will be master in my own house. Come back here!"

He spoke with such fury that I was afraid to go, and looked irresolutely
to Willy for help. But before he could speak, my uncle's mood had
changed.

“Let her go if she likes," he said suddenly, staring at me with a sort
of stupefaction. “Good God! Let her go if she likes; let her go!" he
cried, covering his eyes with his hands and dropping into a chair, and
as I slipped out of the room I heard him groan.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VIII.

PAIN.

    “Go from me. Yet I know that I shall stand
     Henceforward in thy shadow."


I do not often get a headache, but the one which woke me next morning
seemed determined to bring my average of pain up to the level of that of
less fortunate people. All day long it pressed like a burning cap over
my head, till my pillow felt as if it were a block of wood, and the thin
chinks of light that came through the closed shutters cut my eyes like
the blades of knives. The infrequent sounds in the quiet house--the
far-off shutting of a door, the knocking of the housemaid's broom
against the wainscot in the corridor, or an occasional footstep in the
hall--all jarred upon my aching brain as if it had lost some accustomed
shelter, and the blows of sound struck directly upon its bruised nerves.

The wretchedness of the day before had given way to the supremacy of
physical suffering. I lay in my darkened room, thinking of nothing
except how best to endure the passing of the slow hours. Once, as the
clock in the hall struck three, I was conscious of some association
connected with the sound, and remembered that this was the hour at which
I should have been starting for Mount Prospect.

But it had all lost reality. Even the horror of that scene with my uncle
and Willy in the drawing-room had been for the time obliterated, wiped
out by the pain, of which it had partly been the cause. All that I felt
was that some trouble surely was there, and, though in abeyance for
to-day, it was already in possession of to-morrow, and of many
to-morrows.

When, on the next morning, after breakfast in bed, I made my way
downstairs, I felt as if a long time had gone by since I had crossed the
hall. The house was cold and deserted. I dreaded meeting my uncle, but I
saw no one; there was not even a dog to wish me good morning. In the
drawing-room, the fire had only just been lighted; the blinds were drawn
to the top of the windows, showing the various layers of dust in the
room, from the venerable accumulation under the piano, to the lighter
and more recent coating on the tables. I went straight to the
writing-table, and, regardless of the cheerless glare from the sheet of
grey sea, I began a letter to Aunt Jane.

Upstairs, in the early hours of the morning, it had seemed an easy and
not disagreeable thing to do--to write and tell her that my Irish visit
was over, and that, as soon as her answer had come, I should be ready to
start for America. But when the letter was closed and directed, I sat
looking at it for a long time, feeling that I had done something akin to
making my will. The best part of my life was over; into these past three
months had been crushed its keenest happiness and unhappiness, and this
was what they had amounted to. They had none the less now to fall into
the background, and soon would have no more connection with my future
life than if they had never been.

I had convinced myself so thoroughly that by writing to Aunt Jane I had
closed this epoch in my life, that when, a few minutes afterwards, Willy
came into the room, I was almost surprised to find that he was as
awkward and constrained as when I had seen him last.

“Oh! I didn't know you were in here, Theo," he said apologetically,
stopping short half-way across the room. “I only came in to look for a
pen."

“Come in, Willy," I answered, with an appearance of ease which was the
result of the high, unemotional standpoint on which I had taken up my
position. “I have just finished my letter-writing."

“I hope your head's all right to-day? The governor was asking after you
yesterday," he said, rolling his cap in his hands, and looking at the
ground. “He was very sorry to hear your headache was so bad."

I knew that he was trying, as well as he could, to apologize for his
father's outbreak and its too obvious cause.

“That was very kind of him," I made haste to answer. “My headache is
quite well. I was thinking of going out, as it looks as if the east wind
had gone."

“Yes, it's a nice day. I dare say it would do you good to go out."

Nothing could have made me feel more plainly the break that had come in
what had been such “a fair fellowship" than his making no offer to come
with me, and I realized with sharp regret that I had done well in
writing that letter to Aunt Jane.

Willy turned to leave the room.

“I wanted to tell you about this letter," I said. “I have just written
to Aunt Jane to say that I am going back to America in about a
fortnight."

His back had been towards me when I began to speak, but he faced round
with an exclamation of astonishment.

“What! going away? Why are you doing that?"

His face was red with surprise, and he had forgotten his shyness.

“I thought Uncle Dominick would have told you. I spoke to him a couple
of days ago."

“He never said so to me. On the contrary----" Willy stopped. “I mean, he
didn't give me the least idea you were going."

“For all that, I am afraid I must go. I have been here an immense time
already," I said, finding some difficulty in maintaining an easy and
conventional tone.

“Indeed, you haven't!" he blurted out. “You know you told me you meant
to stay on into the spring, and--and you know"--looking steadily over my
head out of the window while he spoke--“there's no reason why----"

“Oh yes, there is, Willy," I said, interrupting him. “Poor Aunt Jane has
been by herself all this time. I ought not to leave her alone any
more."

“Well, and won't you be leaving us alone too?"--still without changing
the direction of his eyes.

“Oh! you will be no worse off than you were before I came," I answered,
with the hasty indiscretion of argument.

He did not reply, and I had time to be sorry for my thoughtlessness,
before he said, with an assumption of carelessness--

“Well, I'm going out now, and I advise you to do the same." He left the
room; but, reopening the door, put his head in--“I say, don't send that
letter," he said, and shut the door again before I could answer.

I did not meet Uncle Dominick at lunch. Roche told me not to wait for
him, as he was not well, and would probably not come in; and I had
almost finished my solitary meal before Willy appeared. He and I were
both more at our ease than we had been at our first meeting that
morning. I do not know what had operated in his case, but for myself, I
felt more than ever that I had become a different person--a person to
whom nothing mattered very much, whose only link with the everyday life
of the past and present was a very bitter and humiliating pain.

“I have to go into Moycullen this afternoon," said Willy, occupying
himself very busily with the carving of the cold beef. “I was wondering
if you might care to ride there. The horse wants exercise, and I thought
perhaps--you said something about wanting fresh air----"

I did not know how to refuse an invitation so humbly given, although my
first inclination had been to do so.

“It is rather a long ride," I began doubtfully.

“Well, you can turn back whenever you like."

I debated with myself. As I was going away so soon, it could not make
much real difference to any one; and Uncle Dominick had specially asked
me not to neglect Willy. Besides--I could not help it--some faint hope
struggled up in my heart that in Moycullen I might hear something of the
O'Neills.

“Very well," I said finally; “I will go with you."

Willy and I had often ridden to Moycullen. It was a long ride, but we
had established a short cut across the fields at one place which
considerably shortened the distance; though experience had shown us that
the amount of jumping it involved, and the rough ground to be crossed,
did away with any great saving of time. To-day we went in off the road
at the usual gap, and as we cantered over the grass to the accustomed
spot in each fence, the free stride of the horse, and the tingling of
the wind in my cheeks, brought back the old feeling of exultant
independence, the last remnant of my headache cleared away, and for the
time I even forgot that quiet, incessant aching at my heart.

One or two successful conflicts with his horse had done much to restore
Willy's confidence and self-possession.

“It's a long time since we had a ride now," he said, after we had come
out over a bank on to the road again.

“Yes; I was just thinking the same. I am very glad I came out."

“We must try and get a look at the hounds next week; they meet pretty
close--that is to say"--continuing his sentence with something of a
jerk--“if you're not too busy packing for America then."

I did not answer, and Willy said nothing more until we had pulled up
into a walk on some rising ground, from which we could see the town of
Moycullen straggling out of an opening between two hills, its
whitewashed houses showing dimly through the blue smoke which lay about
it like a lake.

“And did you send that letter, after all?" Willy said, in an unconcerned
way.

“Yes," I answered; “you know I always write to Aunt Jane on Friday."

“Then you mean to say you are really going back?"

I nodded.

“Well, I suppose you know best," he said coldly.

Alaska put her foot on a stone, and stumbled slightly.

“Hold up, you confounded fool!" he said, chucking up her head roughly,
and digging his spurs in.

The mare reared and plunged, and to steady her we broke into a trot,
which brought us into the crooked, crowded streets of Moycullen.

It was market-day, and the carts that had come in with their loads of
butter, turf, fowls, and old women blocked our way in every direction. I
remained on my horse's back while Willy went off about his business, and
for the next half-hour I only caught glimpses of him, doubling round the
immovable groups of talkers, and eluding the beggars with practised
skill as he dived in and out of the little shops. Willy's satisfaction
and confidence in the warehouses of Moycullen, and the amount of
shopping which he contrived to do there, had always been a matter of
fresh surprise to me.

Beggars pestered me; little boys exasperated me by offers to hold
Blackthorn, regardless of the fact that I was on his back; and women
clustered round me on the pavement and discussed my lineage and
appearance, but I was too dispirited to be much amused by their
comments. The glow of my gallop had faded out; I felt cold and tired,
and thought that Willy had never before been so long over his shopping.

At last he appeared unexpectedly at my horse's shoulder.

“I was thinking that you must be dead for want of your tea. I've just
ordered some at Reardon's, and you must come and drink it before we go
home."

I assented without much interest, and began to push Blackthorn through
the crowd. At the hotel I dismounted, and followed Willy listlessly into
the dark, unsavoury commercial room, the only available apartment in
which we could have tea. Its sole occupant got up in obedience to a
whisper from the boots, and hurriedly conveyed himself and his glass of
whiskey and water from the room which had been allotted to him and the
gentlemen of his profession, and I sat down at the long
oil-cloth-covered table and began to pour out the tea, while Willy
battered the fire into a blaze. He had evidently made up his mind to be
cheerful, but as evidently he was not quite certain as to what to talk
about.

I listened with as much intelligence as I could muster to such pieces of
news as he had picked up during his shopping, but our conversation
gradually slackened, and finally came to a full stop. I slowly drank the
contents of my enormous teacup, wondering why it was that at country
hotels the bread and butter and the china were alike abnormally thick. I
noticed that Willy had looked at me undecidedly once or twice during
the last few minutes, and at length he said, in a way that showed he had
been framing the question for some time--

“I suppose, if you went to America, you'd be coming back again?"

“Come back!" I echoed. “No, I do not think there is the least chance of
my doing that."

I had finished my tea, and got up as I spoke.

“Then you've done with the old country altogether?"

“Yes; altogether," I answered resolutely, turning aside to study one of
the oleographs on the walls.

I could not have said another word, but, in a sort of defiance of my own
weakness, I began to hum a tune, one that had been in my mind
unrecognized all day. Now as I hummed it the straining sweetness of the
notes of a violin filled my memory, and I knew where and how I had heard
it last.

Willy said nothing more, but finished his tea, and, getting up, rang the
bell and ordered the horses to be brought round. We had to stand for a
minute in the doorway while they were coming. A cold wind was springing
up with the sunset; the pale yellow light was contending with the newly
lighted street-lamps, and over my head a large jet of gas flickered
drearily behind the name “Reardon" on the fan-light.

“Hullo! look at the Clashmore wagonette," Willy said suddenly. “It's
coming along now behind that string of turf-carts."

The turf-carts lumbered slowly down the narrow street, the chestnuts and
wagonette having, perforce, to follow at a foot-pace. On the box,
sharply outlined against the frosty sky, I saw Nugent's figure, and
inside was a huddled mass of furs, which I supposed was Madam O'Neill.
My first instinct was to shrink back into the hall, but it was too late;
Willy was already taking off his hat, and I bowed mechanically as Nugent
lifted his, and drove past without speaking.

We rode quickly and steadily homewards through the darkening hills, an
occasional word only breaking the silence between us. I had no wish to
speak, no wish for anything but to escape from this miserable place, and
to forget all that had happened to me since the night when I had first
driven along this very road. This was the fulfilment of the foolish,
unacknowledged hope which had been my real reason for to-day's ride. I
had met Nugent, and could take home with me the certainty that I had
made no mistake as to what his letter had meant, and that he, for his
part, would be quite sure that I had treated him, and was now treating
my cousin, in a manner worthy even of the evil traditions of “American
girls."

It was quite dark when we got to Durrus, but, as the gates swung back, I
could see that it was Anstey who had opened them for us. I rode through
a little in advance of Willy, who had checked his horse in order to let
me go first. I thought I caught the sound of a whispered word or two
from Anstey, and, with the clang of the closing gate, I distinctly heard
Willy say in a low voice, “No, I can't."

I rode fast up the avenue so that he should not overtake me. I was sick
at heart at this confirmation of what my uncle had told me. Everything
was going wrong. I had spoilt my own life, and now I had to stand by
and see Willy ruin his, knowing that I had it, perhaps, in my power to
save him, and yet feeling incapable of doing so.

When I met Uncle Dominick at dinner, his manner was more blandly
affectionate than I had ever known it, and but for the recollections
which his haggard face called up, I should have thought that the scene
of two nights ago had been a dream.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IX.

GARDEN HILL.

    “Was this to meet? Not so; we have not met."


Wednesday was the Burkes' At Home day. They were the only people in the
country who had taken to themselves a “day," and to go and see them, and
to eat their peculiarly admirable cakes, had become a recognized method
of spending that afternoon. To-day, at about four o'clock, when I came
in, their small drawing-room was full of people, and their confidential
little copper tea-kettle was already making incessant journeys between
the fireplace and the tea-table.

Mr. Jimmy Barrett was carrying about cups of tea, steering his perilous
way among the low velvet-covered tables and basket chairs with a face
expressive of the liveliest apprehension. He was the only young man
present--a fact in itself sufficiently overwhelming, and now made doubly
so by the attentions which, faute de mieux, were being bestowed upon
him by Miss Dennehy, a young lady whom I remembered as having been much
sought after at the Mount Prospect dance.

He took the first opportunity of sitting down in an unconspicuous
position behind his mother's chair, from whence he returned feeble and
evasive rejoinders to the badinage levelled at him from the sofa, on
which were seated Miss Dennehy and the rector's daughter, Miss Josie
Horan. His mother, a lady whose ample proportions were a tacit reproach
to her son's meagreness of aspect, reclined imposingly in a chair by
the fire, and several other ladies whom I did not know were sitting
round the room.

The Misses Burke and their mother welcomed me effusively.

“Where's Willy? I haven't seen him this long while," said Miss Mimi,
regarding me with an expression of heartiest curiosity and good
fellowship.

“No, indeed," said Mrs. Burke; “we were wondering what had become of you
both."

She was a brisk little old lady, whose bright black eyes and hooked nose
were suggestive of an ancient parrakeet, and whose voice further carried
out the idea. I knew well that any cross-examination that she might
subject me to would be as water unto wine compared with Miss Mimi's, and
I gladly turned and addressed myself to her, and left Willy, who had
just come into the room, to satisfy Miss Mimi's thirst for information.

His entrance caused a perceptible flutter in the room, and the occupants
of the sofa at once began a loud and attractive conversation.

“I'm dying to hear more about the ball," began Miss Horan. “Aggie,
you're really no good at all"--this with artless petulance to Miss
Dennehy. “I'm sure Captain Sarsfield could give a better account of it.
He wasn't sitting on the stairs all the time; were you, Captain
Sarsfield?"

“I don't think she should ask us these questions, should she, Captain
Sarsfield?" responded Miss Dennehy. “I think 'tis very wrong to tell
tales out of school!"

I, from the low chair which I had taken beside Mrs. Barrett, listened in
some anxiety to a discussion which for both Willy and me was of so
singularly discomposing a character. Willy, however, was equal to the
occasion. Having fittingly assured Miss Dennehy of his abhorrence of
tale-bearing, he provided himself with a cup of tea and a wedge of cake,
and proceeded with unimpaired equanimity to seat himself on the sofa
between Miss Horan and Miss Dennehy.

I had seldom seen Miss Horan, except behind the harmonium in her
father's church, and should certainly never have suspected her of the
social gifts which she now displayed. She had a flat little face, set in
a shock of hair which had once been short and had not yet become long.
Her pale blue eyes almost watered with pride and excitement, as she
found that her conversation with Willy was attracting the attention of
the rest of the room.

“And who was the belle of the room, Captain Sarsfield?" she asked, when
Willy had comfortably settled down to his tea.

“Well, as you weren't there, Miss Horan," answered my cousin,
shamelessly, “I wasn't able to make up my mind about it."

A delighted titter ran round the room at this sally; as it ceased, Mrs.
Barrett broke the monumental silence which she had hitherto preserved.

“My Jimmy," she said, in a heavy, distinct voice, that lent an almost
Scriptural tone to her utterances, casting an eye of disfavour at Miss
Josie, “told me that Miss Sarsfield and Miss O'Neill were the belles of
the ball."

Deep as was my dismay at this unlooked-for statement, it was far
excelled by that of its originator. On Willy's arrival he had altogether
effaced himself; but now, from his refuge behind his mother's chair, I
heard him inarticulately disclaiming the dashing criticism attributed to
him.

“Oh," said Miss Mimi, jovially, “we all know that Jimmy has an eye for a
pretty girl! I thought," she continued, addressing Miss Dennehy, “they
were very bad about introducing people the other night. Didn't you,
Aggie?"

“Really, I didn't notice it, Miss Burke; but I heard a great many
complaining about it, and I know the Croly girls like to keep their
gentlemen friends to themselves," Miss Dennehy replied.

“Well," said Miss Horan, “I saw Sissy Croly yesterday, and she said
that, indeed, she was introducing gentlemen all the evening. Oh, and she
was mad with the O'Neills! She said that Connie O'Neill thought no one
good enough to dance with but that officer they had staying at
Clashmore; and as for Mr. O'Neill, he pretended he was engaged for
every dance, and her fawther"--it was thus that Miss Horan pronounced
“father"--“found him, after supper, sitting in the library reading the
paper."

“Oh, I dare say," said Miss Dennehy. “I know he was engaged to me for
the last extra, and as he didn't choose to come for it, I didn't choose
to wait for him; did I, Captain Sarsfield?"

Mrs. Burke's continuous twitter of talk did not so engross me that I
could not hear all this, and remember that it was Willy who, after his
unavailing search for me, had become Nugent's substitute, and something
in the rigid twist of his neck away from my direction told me that he
too had not forgotten the antecedents of that dance. Since her last
speech Mrs. Barrett had been as silent as she was motionless. I should
almost have thought she was asleep, but her eyes wandered to each
person's face as they spoke, and somehow suggested to me the idea of an
intelligent restless spirit imprisoned in a featherbed. She now saved
Willy the necessity of replying.

“I wonder why the young ladies in this country are so anxious to dance
with Nugent O'Neill, as they all abominate him so much?" she inquired
solemnly.

Miss Horan and Miss Dennehy looked speechlessly round for sympathy at
this accusation, but before their indignation found words, a diversion
was created by the entrance of Mrs. Jackson-Croly and her daughters.
Miss Sissy Croly lingered at the door to speak to some one in the hall.
I recognized the voice which replied to her, though I could not hear the
words, and some instinct of self-defence made me rush into conversation
with Jimmy Barrett before Nugent followed Miss Croly into the room.

Since the day I had gone into Moycullen I had been slowly and, as I
thought, successfully hardening my heart. I had made a mistake, but it
was not an irretrievable one, and here was an opportunity of proving to
myself how little it had really affected me. So I talked sedulously to
Mr. Jimmy Barrett, until, Mrs. Croly's greetings to the Burkes over,
manners demanded that I should shake hands with her. Nugent was standing
near, speaking to Miss Burke, and as I turned from Mrs. Croly he paused
in his conversation.

“How do you do, Miss Sarsfield?" he said formally; then, after a
moment's silence, he spoke again to Miss Burke--“Yes, I was to have
started off yesterday, but I could not manage it, and I thought I
should like to see you before I go, as I may not be back again for some
time."

“Why, every one is going away from the country!" said Miss Mimi,
directing her discourse to me. “Willy was saying, now this minute, that
he was afraid you were thinking of being off too?"

“Yes; I have been thinking of it, but I am not sure. I have to wait for
an answer from my aunt in Boston before I arrange anything," I said,
with a confusion which took me unawares.

Miss Burke looked at me with delighted sagacity.

“Oh, now, I know quite well what that means! I don't believe you're
going away at all--do you, Mr. O'Neill?"

In spite of my own embarrassment, it gave an indefinable pleasure to
see, in the imperfect light afforded by Miss Burke's lace-shrouded
windows, that Nugent's imperturbable face was slowly changing in colour
from its usual brown to a dull crimson.

But Miss Mimi, in the fullness of her heart, did not wait for his
answer.

“I'll talk to Willy about it," she went on. “I'll engage he won't let
you be running away from us like this!"

The fact that Nugent had turned away, and was speaking to Miss Croly,
gave me sufficient assurance to make some airy response. But I had lost
confidence in myself, and, cutting short the conversation, I again took
refuge in my chair near Mrs. Barrett.

For some little time Mrs. Jackson-Croly's voice dominated the room, and
obviated all necessity for conversation on the part of any one else. She
also was talking of going away.

“Yes, Mrs. Burke," she said; “I'm thinking of taking the girls to
Southsea. There's such nice military society there. I always like to
take them to England as often as I can, on account of the accent. I
loathe a Cork brogue! My fawther took me abroad every year; he was so
alormed lest I'd acquire it, and I assure you, when we were children, he
used to insist on mamma's putting cotton wool in our ears when we went
to old Mr. Flannagan's church, for fear we'd ketch his manner of
speaking."

“Dear, dear!" said Mrs. Burke, sympathetically, wholly unmoved by this
instance of the refinement of Mrs. Croly's father. “Poor old Johnny
Flannagan! He had a beautiful voice in the pulpit. I declare"--turning
to me--“sometimes you'd think the people out in the street would hear
him, and the next minute you'd think 'twas a pigeon cooing to you."

At another time I should probably have been inclined to lead Mrs. Burke
on to more reminiscences of this gifted divine, but my sole idea now was
to get away as soon as possible. I looked to see if Willy had nearly
finished his tea, but found that it was still in progress; in fact, when
I looked round, Miss Dennehy and Miss Horan were engaged in throwing
pieces of cake into his open mouth, loud laughter announcing equally the
success or failure of their aim. Willy caught my eye, and guiltily shut
his mouth.

“Do you want the horses, Theo?" he said, rightly interpreting my look,
and hastily getting up from the sofa, while small pieces of cake fell
off him in every direction. “I'll go round and see about them."

“Now, you needn't be in such a hurry, Willy," said Miss Burke, getting
up. “There's just light enough left to show your cousin my new Plymouth
Rocks. I've been telling her all about them; and I've the doatiest
little house built for them in the yard! Come along, Miss Sarsfield;
we'll slip out by the greenhouse while he's getting the horses;" and,
snatching up a purple woollen antimacassar from the back of the chair,
she wrapped her head and shoulders in it, and with total unconsciousness
of her extraordinary appearance she led me out of the room.

The evening had grown very cold. I had felt smothered in the little
drawing-room, but now I shivered as I stood by the wired enclosure in
the corner of the garden, watching the much-vaunted Plymouth Rocks
picking and scratching about their gravel yard, and listening with
simulated intelligence to Miss Burke's harangue upon their superiority
to all other tribes of hens. Beyond the fact that hens laid eggs in
greater or less profusion, I knew nothing about them. But, fortunately,
Miss Mimi's enthusiasm asked for no more than the stray word or two of
ignorant praise with which I filled up her infrequent pauses.

My eyes took in, without losing any detail of absurdity, the effect of
her large face and majestic nose, surmounted by the purple antimacassar,
but my brain did not seem to receive any definite impression from it.
Every faculty was deadened by the battle between pride and despair that
was being fought out in me again. I had persuaded myself that that fight
was over and done with; but now as I stood in the damp twilight, and
looked at the firelit drawing-room windows, I felt that this time
despair might be likely to get the mastery.

Miss Mimi's voice broke strangely in on my thoughts.

“Well, now, wait a moment till I go round to the back," she said. “Me
greatest beauties are roosting in the house; but I must run into the
kitchen for the key, and then I can get in and poke them out for you to
see them."

She went round through a door in the thick fuchsia hedge, which
encircled the garden and divided it from the yard, and left me standing
by myself in the chilly silence of the evening. I had almost forgotten
what I was waiting there for, though it could not have been more than
three or four minutes since Miss Burke left me, when I heard steps come
through the yard, and the faint smell of cigarettes penetrated the
hedge. A horse's hoofs clattered on the stones as it was led out of the
stable.

“Well, good-bye, Nugent," said Willy's voice. “Will you be away long?"

“Yes; I dare say I shall not be home for some time. I am thinking of
going abroad for a bit."

“Abroad? Where to? Is it to Cannes again? Or will you take a run over
to--to the U-nited States?" said Willy, with an indifferent assumption
of an American accent.

One or two movements from the horse filled the brief silence which
ensued, and when Nugent spoke again it was evident he had mounted.

“No," he said; “that's about the last place I should ever want to go to.
Well, good-bye. I suppose I shall find you here when I get back?" He
went on a few steps, and stopped. “Say good-bye to Miss Sarsfield for
me, will you?" he said, and rode out of the yard.




[Illustration: text decoration]

PART III.

PROFIT AND LOSS.




CHAPTER I.

A THREAT.

    “With morning wakes the will, and cries,
    'Thou shalt not be the fool of loss.'"

    “A night of mystery. Strange sounds are swept
     Through the dim air."


Aunt Jane's answer to my letter had come. It had been much what I
expected it would be; she said she would be satisfied to see me back at
any time I saw fit to come, and she even unbent so far as to say that
the sooner that was, the better pleased she would be.

That was a week ago, and I was still at Durrus. If I had kept to my
original idea, I should by this time have been on the Atlantic; but the
steamer by which I had meant to have sailed was only taking to Aunt Jane
a letter, in which I had for the present, at all events, postponed my
return. I had not been able to explain very clearly my reasons for
changing my mind--principally for the excellent one that I was not quite
certain what they were. As the date on which I had settled to go came
nearer, it had appeared to me that the imperative necessity for my
leaving Durrus became more and more imaginary.

I had gradually come to take fresh views of life. It was not very long
since I had seen, for the first time, a new aspect of it, and had weakly
given myself over to its enchantment. But since then I had made up my
mind that that aspect was one that did not concern me personally any
more, and I now believed that there was nothing to prevent me from
going on with my life in the old way, as if I had never had that glimpse
of another possible future.

My idea that on Willy's account I ought to go away had changed into the
directly opposite conviction, that on his account I ought to stay. What
my uncle had said to me about him that morning in the garden had not, I
must admit, very greatly disquieted me. I knew very well--I could not
help knowing it--that what he had said was true, and that it was my
influence which, though unintentionally on my part, had driven Anstey's
into the background. But I would not believe his warning that there was
any further danger in the future.

Poor little Anstey! Uncle Dominick's hints had made me think with a
great deal of unavailing pity about her. The recollection of her soft
eyes and deprecating voice made his definition of her as “an impudent
girl" singularly inappropriate. I had very little doubt but that Willy,
being both susceptible and idle, had amused himself, for want of better
occupation, by making love to her, and, so far from pitying him for
being “entangled," all my sympathies were on the side of the
“entangler." Even if he had ever had any real feeling for her, it had
become, I was very sure, a thing of the past; and, knowing Uncle
Dominick's strong wish that I should stay at Durrus, I believed that he
had ingeniously used this imaginary peril as a reason for my doing so.

However, that whispered interchange of words at the gate on the way home
from Moycullen, gave unexpected reality to his fears as to the
consequences of a “misunderstanding" between Willy and me. Here was his
prophecy being fulfilled, and I was all the angrier with Willy from the
haunting feeling that it was I who had to a great extent revived this
undesirable state of things. It was of no use to try and persuade myself
that I had no real moral responsibility in the matter. My conscience had
developed an exasperating sensitiveness in connection with Willy, and
was persistently deaf to the excellent arguments which I brought to bear
upon it. I began to wonder whether it might not be possible to undo some
of the harm I had done, by beginning over again with Willy on new
lines--by adopting a friendliness so frank and so unsentimental, that he
should gradually be led into a state of calm and cousinly companionship.

I lost no time in trying the experiment, but after a few days I had to
confess to myself that it was uphill work. Willy was baffling, more
baffling than I had believed he ever could be. I did not even know
whether he appreciated the cheerfulness which I sometimes found it so
hard to keep up. There was a latent moroseness about him by which,
perhaps from its unaccustomedness, I could not help being a little
overawed. It bewildered me and set me at fault to see him spend the
evening, as he often did, in virtuously reading some standard work,
instead of wasting it in our old good-for-nothing way, by sitting over
the fire and doing nothing more profitable than playing with the dogs
and talking illiterate gossip. I could not make him out. I had once
thought his character a very simple one, so much so as to be almost
uninterestingly transparent, and this new complexity occupied my mind
and mystified me considerably. I suppose mystery is always interesting,
and just then I was inclined to cling to anything that led my thoughts
away from myself. At all events, whatever might have been the cause, I
thought and speculated about him more than I had ever done before.

On the day that we went to the Burkes', he had been more
incomprehensible than ever. He rode there with me in a state of such
profound gloom, that I wondered if it were the result of some
culminating quarrel with his father. I certainly could never have
anticipated the admirable way in which, during the visit, he comported
himself; still less his continued good spirits on the way home. I did
not at the time understand their cause, but I afterwards knew that it
was what had happened that afternoon that had, to a great extent,
cleared the atmosphere. It was now more than a fortnight since then, and
he had had no very serious relapse into moodiness. We had pretty nearly
arrived at the ideal friendly but unromantic footing that I had hoped
for--quite enough for me to permit myself a little self-glorification,
and going back to America any sooner than I had intended seemed more
unnecessary than ever. Uncle Dominick had effaced himself almost
entirely from our lives. Dinner was now the only time during the day
that I saw him, and he used to sit and listen to what we were saying
without joining in it. There was nothing about him to remind me of his
outburst that night in the drawing-room. When he spoke, it was usually
to say something which, for him, was almost affectionate, and his manner
often showed traces of feebleness and exhaustion which were very new
with him.

Thursday, the 28th of January, was Willy's twenty-fifth birthday. We
had fitly celebrated it by going out hunting, and, having come home
hungry after a good day's sport, were now, in consideration of having
had no lunch, indulging in poached eggs at afternoon tea.

“The men in the yard tell me that there are to be great doings to-night
in honour of me," Willy remarked, when the first sharp edge had been
taken off his appetite. “There's to be a bonfire outside the front gate,
and Conneen the piper, and dancing, and everything. It means that I'll
have to send them a tierce of porter, and that you'll have to turn out
after dinner and go down and have a look at them."

“So long as they don't ask me to dance, I shall be very glad to go. But
would your father mind?"

“Mind? Not he! You're such a 'white-headed boy' with him these times,
you can do what you like with him. By Jove, he's a deal fonder of you
than he ever was of me!" said Willy, with ungrudging admiration.

“I am sure he is not," I said lazily, and as much for the sake of
contradiction as from any false modesty. “It is most unlikely. I know if
I were he, I should naturally like you better than I like myself."

“What on earth are you trying to say?" said Willy. “Would you mind
saying it all over again--slowly?"

“I mean," I said, slightly confused, but sticking to my point--“I mean
that if I were your father, I should see a great many more reasons for
being fond of you than I should of me."

“Well, as far as I can make that out," said Willy, grinning
exasperatingly, “it seems to me that it's a pity you're not my father."

“You know perfectly well what I mean. Just suppose that I was your
father----"

“I'd rather not, thanks."

I did not heed the interruption. “I should be much fonder of you----"

“Then, why aren't you?"

“I don't care what you say," I said, feeling I was getting the worst of
it; “I know what I mean quite well, and so would you, only that you
choose to be an idiot." And, getting up, I left the room with all speed,
in order to have the last word in a discussion which was taking a rather
difficult tone.

The sea-fog had crept up from the harbour towards evening, and it fell
in heavy drops from the trees upon Willy and me as we walked down the
avenue after dinner to see the bonfire. There was no moon visible, but
the milky atmosphere held some luminous suggestion of past or coming
light. It was a still night; we could hear the low booming of the sea in
the caves below the old graveyard, and the nearer splashing of the
rising tide among the Durrus rocks.

“There's no sound I hate like that row the ground-swell makes out there
at the point," said Willy. “If you're feeling any way lonely, it makes
you want to hang yourself."

“I like it," I said, stopping to listen. “I often lie awake and listen
to it these nights, when the westerly wind is blowing."

“Maybe you'd get enough of doing that if you were here by yourself for a
bit, and knew you'd got to stop here. I tell you you've no notion what
this place is like in the winter. Sometimes there's not a creature in
the country to speak to from one month's end to another."

“I ought to know something about it by this time."

“You think you do," he answered, with a short laugh. “But you can't very
well know what it was like before you came, no more than you can tell
what it will be like when you're gone."

We moved on again.

“Cannot you ever get away?" I asked sympathetically.

“No; how could I leave the governor? I tell you," he went on, “that if
you were boxed up here with no one to talk to but him, you'd go anywhere
for company." He stopped for a moment. “Do you know that, before you
came here last October, I was as near making a fool of myself as ever a
chap was"--breaking off again, but continuing before I could speak--“I
believe I didn't care a hang what I did with myself then. I suppose
you'll think that I'm an ass, but it's very hard to have no one at all
who cares about you."

“I am sure it must be," I said, feeling very uncomfortable, and walking
quickly on.

I had a nervous feeling that in confidences of this kind I might find
the “calm and cousinly" footing that I so much desired, slipping from
under my feet.

We were now near the gate, and could already hear the squeals of the
bagpipe, and see the glare of the bonfire in the fog. All round the
semi-circular sweep outside the lodge, a row of women and girls were
seated on the ground, with their backs to the ivy-covered wall, while a
number of men and boys were heaping sticks on to a great glowing mound
of turf that was burning in the middle of the road. The barrel of porter
which Willy had sent was propped up in one of the niches in the wall,
and in the other niches, and along the top of the walls, were clustered
innumerable little boys.

As Willy and I came through the open gates, a sort of straggling cheer
was set up by the men, which was shrilly augmented and prolonged by
shrieks from the children in the niches. Willy walked up to the bonfire.

“Well, boys," he said, “that's a great bonfire you have. I'm glad to see
you all here."

At this moderate display of eloquence there was another cheer, and as it
died away, a very old man, in knee-breeches and tail-coat, came forward,
and, to my intense amazement, kissed Willy's hand.

“I'm a tenant in Durrus eighty-seven years," he said, “an' if I was
dyin' this minute, I'd say you were the root and branch of your
grandfather's family! Root and branch--root and branch!"

I was not given time to ponder over the meaning of this occult
commendation, for an old woman, darting forward, snatched Willy's hand
from the man. She also began by kissing it resoundingly, but, with an
excess of adoration, she flung it from her.

“On the mout'! on the mout'!" she screamed, flinging her arms round him;
and then, dragging his face down to hers, she suited the action to the
word.

Willy submitted to the salute with admirable fortitude; but, in order to
avoid further demonstrations of a similar kind, he called upon Conneen
the piper to play a jig. I heard from the other side of the road a long
preliminary drone, and the piper, a weird-looking, crippled hunchback,
seated on a donkey, began to produce from his bagpipes a succession of
sounds of varying discordancy, known as “The Foxhunter's Jig."

I drew back into the smaller gateway to watch the dance. The figures of
the four dancers showed darkly against the background of firelit, steamy
fog, and the flames of a tar-barrel which had just been thrown upon the
bonfire glared unsteadily on the faces of the people, and on the glowing
network of branches overhead. Willy was one of the four who were
dancing, and was covering himself with glory by the number and intricacy
of his steps. He had chosen as his partner the stout lady in whose
cottage we had once sheltered from the rain, and above the piercing
efforts of the bagpipes to render in “The Foxhunter's Jig" the various
noises of the chase, the horn, the hounds, and the hunters, the plaudits
of the audience rose with more and more enthusiasm.

“More power, Masther Willy!"

“Tighten yourself now, Mrs. Sweeny!"

“Ah ha! d'ye mind that for a lep! He's the divil's own dancer!"

I looked on and listened to it all from the gateway, feeling, in spite
of my Sarsfield blood, a stranger in a strange land. I did not recognize
many of the people about me; beyond some of the junior members of the
Durrus household, who nodded to me with the chastened, reserved
friendliness of the domestic servant when away from her own roof, and
Mary Minnehane, whose white teeth shone in a broad grin when I looked at
her, I knew no one. Neither Anstey nor her mother were anywhere to be
seen, though I had looked up and down the row of faces several times for
them. A small, ugly old man, whom I knew to be Michael Brian, the
lodge-keeper, was in charge of the barrel of porter. I noticed during
the dance that, although he never took his eyes off the dancers, he did
not applaud, and before it was over he left the barrel in the care of a
subordinate, and went past me into the lodge.

In a minute or two he returned, bringing Anstey with him, and she began
to help him in dispensing the porter. The niche in which it was placed
was quite near to where I was standing, and I could hear him scolding
her in a low voice. She looked frightened and unhappy, and Willy's
half-confession on the way down made me watch her with a peculiar,
pitying interest. When the jig had ended with a long squeal from the
pipes, intended, I presumed, to represent the fox's death-agony, Willy
led his breathless partner back to her place, and slowly made his way to
me, amid a shower of compliments and pious ejaculations.

“Phew I'm mostly dead!" he said, leaning against the gatepost beside
me, and fanning himself with his cap. “Mrs. Sweeny has more going in
her than ten men, and dancing on the gravel is no joke."

While he was speaking, I saw that his eye had fallen on Anstey, and
almost imperceptibly he faced more and more in my direction, till his
back was turned to her and her father. Another dance began, but, instead
of joining in it, he lighted a cigarette and went on talking to me.

“Perhaps we'd better be getting home," he said presently. “You must have
seen about enough of it."

We moved from where we were standing into the carriage-drive, and he
said a general good night to the assemblage. The jig was stopped, and
one of the dancers shouted--

“Three cheers for Masther Willy!"

“Huzzay!" rose the chorus.

“And three cheers for Miss Sarsfield!" called out a woman's voice,
which I fancied I recognized as my friend Mary Minnehane's, and another
“Huzzay!" arose in my honour.

Willy looked at me with a beaming face.

“Do you hear that, Theo? You see, they think a good deal of you too."

“It's very kind of them," I replied, retreating precipitately into the
darkness; “but I hope they don't expect me to make a speech."

“Masther Willy!"

I heard a hoarse whisper behind me, and, looking back, I saw that old
Michael Brian had followed Willy through the gates.

“Masther Willy, aren't you goin' to dance with my gerr'l?"

“No, I'm not; I'm going home," said Willy, roughly. He turned away, but
Brian caught his sleeve.

“Ah! come back now and dance with her," he said, in a part bullying,
part wheedling voice; “don't give her the go by."

Willy wrenched away his sleeve.

“Go to the devil! You're drunk!" he said, in a low angry voice.

“Dhrunk is it? Wait a while, and you'll see if I'm dhrunk," said Brian,
following him as he turned from him, and speaking more threateningly.
“Dhrunk or sober, there'll be work yet before ye're done with me."

Willy made no remark on what had taken place as he joined me where I was
standing a few paces in advance of him. I did not know what to say, and
we walked silently away up the avenue. The noise of the bagpipes died
away behind us in the fog, and the moaning rush of the tide, now full
in, on the strand, was again the only sound to be heard. We had got into
the darkness of the clump of elms, when Willy stopped short.

“I thought I heard some one there in the trees," he said. “I wonder if
that old blackguard----" He did not finish the sentence, and we both
listened.

“I don't hear anything now, whatever," he said, moving on. But before we
had gone more than a few steps, I heard a twig snap.

“There is something there," I said apprehensively, coming closer to
him. He felt for my hand, and put it into his arm.

“Never mind; very likely it's only a stray jackass; don't be frightened
at all."

We walked on quickly until we were in the open beyond the little wood,
and we were near the house before he spoke again.

“Theo, I think I've made the most miserable hash of my life that ever
any one did. You needn't say anything, and you needn't think that I'm
going to say anything that would annoy you anyway; but I just feel that
everything's gone against me, and I may as well chuck it all up."

“Oh, that's nonsense, Willy!" I said, trying to speak with more
cheerfulness than I felt. “That is a very poor way of looking at
things."

“Very likely, but it's the only way I've got." We were on the steps by
this time, and he opened the hall door. “Anyhow, it doesn't make much
difference how I look at them; I suppose it will all come to the same
sooner or later."

He shut the door with a bang, and I went upstairs.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER II.

“BUT WHERE IS COUNTY GUY?"

    “What shall assuage the unforgotten pain,
     And teach the unforgetful to forget?"


I lay awake for a long time after I got into bed, and I had not been
long asleep when some sound wakened me. I was at first not sorry to
awake; I had been sleeping uneasily and feverishly, and my dreams had
been full of disasters and difficulties. I did not trouble myself much
as to what the sound was--probably a rat, as the house was overrun with
them--and I tried to see the face of my watch by the light of the fire,
which was still burning brightly. I had made out that it was half-past
one, when I again heard a sound. It was a movement in the next room, as
if a chair had been pushed against by some one moving cautiously in the
dark. I do not pretend to being superior to irrational terrors at night,
and now the blood rushed back to my head from my heart, as I sat up in
bed and tried to persuade myself that what I had heard was the effect of
imagination.

There was dead silence for a few seconds, and then a hand was passed
over the other side of the paper-covered door, as if feeling for the
latch. I could not have moved to save my life, and remained sitting bolt
upright, with my eyes fixed upon the door. It was a weak and badly
fitting one, made of single planks, and at first refused to open, but it
had finally to yield to the pressure applied to it. It opened with a
jerk, and I saw by the firelight that the figure which appeared in the
doorway was neither ghost nor burglar, but was that of the woman whose
special mission it had seemed to be to terrify me ever since I came to
Durrus.

“What do you want?" I demanded, as courageously as I could, though my
voice was less valiant than I could have wished.

Moll advanced a step into the room, keeping her face down and half
averted from me, while her large hands kept clutching and plucking at
the cloak she wore.

“Go away," I said, feeling exceedingly frightened. “You know you are not
allowed to come in here."

She stopped still for a moment, and looked at me. The deep shadows which
the fire threw on her face made it look absolutely appalling. Her lips
moved incessantly, and her malevolent expression, as she glanced at me
out of the corners of her eyes, made me feel certain that she was
trying to curse me; but, except a guttural mouthing sound, I could
distinguish nothing. While this imprecation, or whatever it was, was
going on, she kept edging sideways towards the sofa, and, cautiously
putting out her hand, she picked up the large cushion that was on it.

Still watching; me intently, she moved towards the bed, crushing and
working the pillow about in her hands. I had no idea what she was going
to do, and wildly thought of making a rush past her to the other door,
and escaping down the corridor; but, beside the disadvantage of leaving
a stronghold where, if the worst came to the worst, I could always pull
the clothes over my head, I had a horrible fear that she might run after
me. I determined to make a last effort, and, before she could come any
closer, I said determinately--

“If you do not go away at once, I shall call the master."

At this, to my unspeakable relief, she looked hastily round over her
shoulder, and let the cushion fall. Drawing the hood of her cloak over
her head, she slowly retreated into the room out of which she had come,
and with a final roll of her dreadful eyes upon me, she closed the
paper-covered door after her. I listened intently, and presently heard
the rustle of her cloak against the walls as she went down the corridor,
and soon afterwards a door in some distant part of the house opened and
shut.

I drew a long breath; she was out of the house now. I got up, and, with
shaking limbs, dragged my big Saratoga trunk against the paper-covered
door, and, having locked the other one, felt comparatively secure. As
might be expected, I did not get to sleep again very easily. I had
always been aware of Moll's animosity towards me, but this was the first
time it had taken active form. As my nerves steadied down, I remembered
the sounds that Willy and I had heard in the avenue on the way home, and
I wondered if jealousy on Anstey's account could have been Moll's motive
in following us, and then in making her way, with what seemed like a
sinister intention, up to my room. Yet it was hard to believe that such
a creature as she was could comprehend and act upon an idea of the kind.
I drowsily tried to connect this dreadful visit with her husband's words
to Willy at the lodge, but before I could arrive at any satisfactory
conclusion I fell asleep.

At breakfast I told Willy the greater part of what had happened, but I
made as light of it all as I could. He was out of spirits, and not like
himself, and I had put off saying anything to him about it until we had
almost finished breakfast. When I had ended my story, he pushed back his
chair from the table and got up.

“I'll make them sorry for this," he said vindictively, his face flushing
darkly as he spoke. “I'll teach that old scoundrel Brian to let Moll
come up here frightening you! You look as white as a sheet this minute."

“I am sure I am nothing of the kind," I answered, trying unsuccessfully
to look at myself in the silver teapot; “there is nothing the matter
with me. If you will fasten up that little door into the other room
before this evening, I shall be perfectly happy."

“Never fear but I will," he said; “and it'll be very queer if I don't
fasten up that old hag too."

He stalked out of the room. I heard him go upstairs and along the
corridor, and presently the noise of hammering echoed through the house.

I met him in the hall soon afterwards, putting on his cap to go out.

“I fixed that door the way it won't be opened again in a hurry," he
said, with grim satisfaction, “and I've locked the other; and now I'm
going to be off to fix Moll herself. She's not such a fool but she'll
understand what I'm going to say to her!"

“I wonder what the attraction in that room was for her?" I said. “I have
seen her in there several times."

“Goodness knows! There was nothing in it, only an old broken chair she
had by the window, and there were a couple of books on the floor that I
suppose she stole out of the study to play with. One looked like an old
diary, or account-book, or something. I meant to bring it to show you,
but I left it in my room with the hammer and nails."

“I am very much obliged to you for shutting up that door," I said, with
sincere gratitude. “I had no idea you were going to do it for me at
once. You are a most reliable person."

He had taken his stick out of the stand, and had opened the hall door;
but he stopped and looked back at me.

“I think I'd do more than that for you," he said, almost under his
breath, and went out of the house.

It was a fine morning, and I finally went for a walk along the cliffs
with the dogs. I expected to hear all about Willy's encounter with Moll
at luncheon; but, on my return to the house, I heard, to my surprise,
that he had ridden into Moycullen, and would probably not be home for
dinner.

The afternoon lagged by. I had tea early, in the hope of shortening it;
but the device did not have much success. As the evening clouded in,
rain began to beat in large drops against the windows, and the rising
wind sighed about the house, and sent puffs of smoke down the
drawing-room chimney. I despised myself for the feeling of forsakenness
which it gave me; but I could help it no more than I could hinder some
apprehensive recollections of Moll's entry into my room. A childish
dread of having all the darkness behind me made me crouch down on the
hearthrug, with my back to the fire, and rouse Pat from a satiated
slumber to sit on my lap for company. Something about the look of the
fire and the sound of the rain was compelling my thoughts back to the
afternoon when I sat and waited here for Nugent. I did not try, as I
had so often tried before, to drive away those thoughts, or to forget
the withheld possibilities of that afternoon. Once more I gave myself
over to the fascination of unprofitable remembrances, yielding to myself
on the plea that it was to be for the last time. After to-day they would
be contraband, made outlaws by the power of a resolution which I had
newly come to--a resolution that I had been driven to by the combined
forces of pity and sympathy and conscience; but to-day, for one final
half-hour, I would allow them to have their way.

Dinner-time came, and with it no appearance of Willy. Uncle Dominick had
for some time given up his custom of waiting in the library to take me
in to dinner, and Willy and I usually found him sitting by the fire in
the dining-room when we went in. To-night, when I came in alone, he
remained seated in his chair.

“We may as well give Willy a few moments' law," he said. “I hear he rode
into Moycullen."

“He told Tom when he was going that you weren't to wait dinner for him,
sir," interposed Roche.

“What business could he have that would detain him so late?" said my
uncle, slowly rising and taking his place at the table. “Can you throw
any light upon this absence, Theo?"

He looked anxious and surprised when I told him that Willy had said
nothing to me about it. Several times during dinner he harked back to
the same subject, and I was more struck than ever by the nervous
uncertainty of his manner, and the strange way in which one idea took
possession of his mind. He looked so ill and worn, that before I left
the room compassion made me screw up my courage to ask him if he would
not sit with me in the drawing-room, instead of going to his own study
by himself.

He shook his head. “You are very good, my dear; it is very kind of you
to express a wish for my society. But I am much occupied in the
evenings--letters to write, accounts to go over. Besides, I am used by
this time to being alone--ah yes!" He walked feebly over to the door,
and opened it for me to leave the room. “You must forgive me," he said.

To my amazement, he stooped down as I passed, and, putting his hand on
my shoulder, he kissed my forehead.




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER III.

“LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST."

    “'Uncover ye his face,' she said;
    'Oh, changed in little space!'"

    “When Pity could no longer look on Pain."


“Faith, I don't know anny more than yourself, miss. 'Twas twelve o'clock
last night when he come home, and Tom says the mare was in such a sweat
when he brought her in that he thought she'd never stop breaking out in
the stable."

“Where has he been all the morning? Did he breakfast long before I did?"

“It wasn't half-past seven, miss, when he was downstairs calling for a
cup of tay from the servants' breakfast, and, afther he taking it, he
went out of the house," Roche answered, rising stiffly from his knees
after he had swept up and replenished the drawing-room grate.

“It is very curious," I said to myself, going over to the window and
looking out on the lawn, where the dogs were engaged in a long,
unsatisfactory wrangle over a duck's claw. “I wonder what has become of
him?"

“Miss Theo," began Roche, impressively, depositing his coal-scuttle in
the middle of the floor, “I don't like the way Masther Willy is, and
that's the thruth. Maggie told me he wasn't in his bed last night at
all; and Tom was saying he had a face on him that would frighten you
when he ordhered the horse yesterday."

Something in Roche's manner implied reproach and inquiry, and I felt
obliged to defend myself. “There was nothing the matter with him when I
saw him last, yesterday morning."

“Is that so, miss?" said Roche, picking up his coal-scuttle preparatory
to leaving the room. “Well, miss, maybe I'm only an owld fool afther
all, but there's things going on I don't like."

Luncheon came, and again I had to eat it in no better company than my
own. I began to feel seriously troubled about Willy, and finally put on
my things and went round to the yard to see if I could hear anything
about him there. He had been in the stables early that morning, to see
the mare get her feed, Mick told me, and he thought he had seen him, a
while ago, going round the shrubberies towards the plantation.

There had been sharp, sleety showers all the morning, and one of them
now began to fall so heavily that I had to take refuge in a stable
while it lasted. I watched it impatiently, as it whipped the surface of
the puddles about the yard and drove the fowls to the friendly shelter
of the coach-house, and at the first signs of its abating I started for
the plantation to look for Willy. By the time I reached the front of the
house, the shower was quite over, and was driving out to sea. A wet
gleam of sunlight shone on the trees, making every branch and twig show
with pale distinctness against the bank of purple cloud behind; a
pilot-boat was beating in to Durrusmore Harbour in the teeth of the cold
south-easterly wind; the curlews screamed fitfully as they flew inland
over my head, and I was weatherwise enough by this time to know that a
storm was not far off.

The shrubberies were chilly and dripping, and their narrow walks were
covered with soaking withered leaves, but they were sheltered from the
wind. I hurried along them, not very certain of where I was going, or
what my exact intention in looking for Willy was. I had come to the
place where I had once left the path to gather ferns by the stream, and
was beginning to realize the absurdity of expecting to find him here,
half an hour at least since Mick had seen him, when, at the angle where
the two paths meet, I came suddenly upon him.

He was sitting on a tumble-down old rustic seat, with his elbows on his
knees, and his face hidden in his hands.

“Willy!" I cried, starting forward, “what is the matter? Are you ill?"

He raised his head, and looked at me vacantly, and for the moment I felt
almost as great a shock as if I had seen him lying dead there; if he
had been dead, his whole look could hardly be more changed than it was
now. A bluish-grey pallor had taken the place of his usually fresh
colouring; his eyes were sunk in dark hollows, but the lids were red;
and I saw, with a shame at surprising them there, the traces of tears on
his cheeks.

“I'm all right," he answered, turning his face away without getting up;
“please don't stay here, Theo. It's only that my head's pretty bad."

A small brown book was lying on the seat beside him, and he put it into
the pocket of his coat while he was speaking. I was too bewildered to
move.

“You'd better go in," he said again; “it's awfully cold and wet for you
to be out here."

The feeling that I was prying upon his trouble, whatever it was, made me
take a few undecided steps away from him; but, looking back, I saw that
he had again relapsed into his old position, and with an uncontrollable
impulse I came back.

“I won't go away, Willy," I said, sitting down beside him; “I can't
leave you here like this. Won't you tell me what it is that is troubling
you?"

He neither lifted his head nor spoke, but I could hear the quick
catchings of his breath. A thrust of sharp pity pierced my heart.

“Do tell me what it is, Willy," I repeated, careless of the break in my
voice, putting one hand on his shoulder, and trying with the other to
draw one of his from his face.

He was trembling all over, and when I touched him he started and let his
hand fall, but he turned still further from me.

“Don't," he said huskily. “You can't do any good; nothing can----"

“What do you mean?" I said, horror-struck at the settled despair in his
voice. “What has happened to you?"

“It's no use your asking me questions," he answered more calmly. “I tell
you there's nothing the matter with me."

“I don't believe you" I said. “Something has happened to you since
yesterday morning. Is it anything that I have done? Is it my fault in
any way?"

“No, it is not your fault." He stood up, and went on wildly, without
looking at me, “But I wish I had died before you came to Durrus! I wish
I was in the graveyard out there this minute! I wish the whole scheming,
infernal crew were in hell--I wish----"

“Oh, stop, Willy!" I cried--“stop! You are frightening me!"

He had been standing quite still, but he had flung out his clenched hand
at every sentence, and his grey eyes were fixed and dilated.

“I don't know what I'm saying; I didn't mean to frighten you," he said,
sitting down again beside me. “I had no right to say that--about wishing
I was dead before you came. Your coming here was the best thing ever
happened to me in my life. I'll always thank God for giving me the
chance of loving you; and no matter what happens, I always will love
you--always--always----"

He caught my hand as if he were going to draw me towards him, but,
checking himself, he let it fall with a groan.

“It's all over now," he said. “Everything's gone to smash."

A rush of wind shivered through the laurels, and shook a quick rattle of
drops from the shining leaves.

“Why should it all be over? Why should not it begin again?"

I said it firmly, but it seemed to me as if I were listening to some one
else speaking.

“What do you mean?" He stared at me.

“I mean that perhaps I made a mistake," I said, beginning to
hesitate--“that perhaps, that night at Mount Prospect, I was wrong in
what I said to you----"

“You're humbugging me!" he said fiercely, without taking his eyes from
my face. “You don't know what you're saying."

“Yes, I do know," I answered, still with that feeling that another
person was speaking for me. “I've thought about it before now, and I
thought perhaps, if you would forgive----"

“Forgive! I don't understand you. Do you mean to say you would marry
me?"

“Yes."

He looked at me stupidly, and staggered to his feet as if he were drunk.

“I'm having a fine time of it!" he said, with a loud harsh laugh. “She
says she'll have me after all, and I've got to say 'No, thank you!'"

He swayed a little as he stood opposite to me, and then, falling on his
knees, he laid his head on my lap, and broke into a desperate sobbing.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IV.

STORM.

    “And all talk died, as in a grove all song
     Beneath the shadow of some bird of prey;
     Then a long silence came upon the hall,
     And Modred thought, 'The time is hard at hand.'"

    “In the shaken trees the chill stars shake.
     Hush! Heard you a horse tread as you spake,
                                Little Brother?"


That night the wind shifted to the south-west, and the storm that came
thundering in from the Atlantic was the worst I had known since I came
to Durrus. The rain had been coming down in furious floods ever since
sunset, and as the night darkened in, the wind dashed it against my
window till I thought the sashes must give way. The roaring of the
storm in the trees never ceased, and once or twice, through the
straining and lashing of the branches, I heard the crash of a falling
bough. The house was full of sounds. The rattling of the ill-fitting
windows, the knocking of the picture-frames against the walls of the
corridor, the loud drip of water from a leak in the skylight into a bath
placed to catch it in the hall. Somewhere in the house a door was
banging incessantly. It maddened me to hear it, more especially now,
when I was trying to determine by the sound if the door which had just
been opened was that of Willy's room. He surely must be in the house on
a night like this; and yet his door had been open, and his room dark,
when I had passed it on my way up to bed an hour ago.

Since he had left me in the plantation--left me sitting there in
stunned horror, with the rain beating down through the laurels upon
me--I had not seen or heard anything of him. He had gone without another
word of explanation, without saying anything to qualify that last
speech, or that could give any clue to the cause of it. It was all dark,
inexplicable. I could only sit over my fire in impotent anxiety, my
brain toiling with confused surmises, and my heart heavy with
apprehension.

I think I never was as fond of Willy, or as truly unhappy about him, as
now, when I had just received from him a slight, the idea even of which
I should a few months ago have laughed at. I did not care about my own
point of view--I even forgot it, in my consuming desire to find out the
reason of Willy's mysterious behaviour during the last two days. Nothing
that had gone before threw any light upon the problem, unless, indeed,
Michael Brian's threat that night of the bonfire had had some incredibly
sinister meaning. No, there was no adequate solution; but the bellowing
of the wind in the chimney, and the sliding clatter of a slate falling
down the roof, brought home to me the one tangible fact that he was
still out of the house, at twelve o'clock on the wildest night of the
year.

The next day was Sunday. The storm raged steadily on, putting all
possibility of going to church out of the question. The shutters on the
western side of the house were all closed, and I sat in the
semi-darkness of the library, trying to read, and looking from time to
time through the one unshuttered window out on to the gravel sweep.
Broken twigs and pieces torn from the weather-slated walls were strewed
over the ground. A great sycamore had fallen across the drive a little
below the house, and the other trees swung and writhed as if in despair
at the long stress of the gale.

Roche came in and out of the room on twenty different pretexts during
the day, and made each an occasion for ventilating some new theory to
explain Willy's absence. I was kneeling on the window-seat, looking out
into the turmoil, as the wind hurried the black rain-clouds across the
sky, and the gloomy daylight faded into night, when he came into the
room again.

“There's a great dhraught from that window, miss," he remarked. “You'd
be best let me shut the shutthers. You'll see no sign of Masther Willy
this day, unless he's coming by the last thrain."

“Why, what makes you think that?" I asked eagerly.

“Well, miss, the postman's just afther being here, and he said there
was one that saw him at the station at Moycullen last night."

“At the station--Moycullen!" I repeated, in bewilderment. “Was he going
away?"

“He was, miss. Sure he was seen getting into the thrain, though the dear
knows where he was going!"

“Have you told the master that he was seen there?"

“I did, miss. Sure he's asking for him the whole day. He's very unaisy
in his mind. He's roaming, roaming through the house all the day, and
he's give ordhers to have his dinner sent to his own room. He wasn't
best pleased when he found Masther Willy had locked up the room that's
next your own, and twice, an' I coming upstairs, I seen him sthriving to
open the door."

“Master Willy did that to prevent Moll getting in there," I explained.
“I will tell the master so myself."

“Don't say a word to him, miss, good nor bad," said Roche, shaking his
knotted forefinger at me expressively. “He'll forget--he'll forget----"
He sniffed significantly, and, as if to prevent himself from saying any
more, he shuffled out of the room.

But Willy did not come by the last train; indeed, the storm was still
too violent for any one to travel. I lay awake the greater part of the
night, filled with feverish fears and fancies. Several times I could
have been sure that I heard some one wandering about the house, and once
I thought there was a shaking and pushing at the locked door of the room
next to mine.

When I awoke next morning, I found that the wind had been at length
beaten down by a deluge of rain, which was descending in a grey
continuous flood, as if it never meant to stop. The day dragged wearily
on. Roche had spoken truly in saying that Uncle Dominick was uneasy and
restless. It seemed to me that he never stopped walking about the house.
I heard him constantly moving backwards and forwards, from the library
to his own study, and every now and then the sound of his footsteps in
Willy's room overhead would startle me for an instant into wondering if
Willy had come home.

The long waiting and suspense had got on my nerves, and the gloom and
silence made the house seem like a prison. I could neither read nor play
the piano. I was debarred from even the society of Pat and Jinny, as, on
the first day of the storm, their muddy footmarks in the hall had made
my uncle angrily order their exile to the stable. I almost looked
forward to dinner-time. I should then at least have occupation, and a
certain amount of society, for half an hour, and there was something
usual and conventional about it which would be a rest after the tension
and loneliness of the day.

Rather to my surprise, I found my uncle standing in the hall when I came
downstairs to dinner.

“What a terrible day this has been!" he said, as he offered me his arm.
“This rain makes the air so oppressive," he sighed, “and I have a great
deal to trouble me."

He helped me to soup, and, having done so, got up and walked over to the
fireplace.

“I have no appetite at all," he said. “I suppose it is caused by loss of
sleep, but I really have a positive distaste for food."

He turned his back to me, and leaned his forehead against the high
mantelshelf, while I went on with my dinner as well as I could. After a
little time, however, he came back to the table.

“Dear me! I am forgetful of my duties! Will you not take a glass of
wine? You must be tired after your long drive in the snow from
Carrickbeg." Mentioning a station between Cork and Moycullen.

I stared. “But I have not been out to-day."

He put his hand to his head. “How forgetful I am!" he said hastily. “But
the fact is, I am so upset by anxiety about Willy that I do not know
what I am saying."

“Then, have you heard that Willy is at Carrickbeg?" I asked excitedly.

“No, my dear, no," he said, shaking his head two or three times; “I know
nothing about him. I confused Carrickbeg with Moycullen. Till a few
years ago, Carrickbeg was our nearest station, and in those days
travellers did not arrive here till one o'clock in the morning--one
o'clock on a cold snowy morning." He slowly repeated to himself, with a
shudder.

I felt very sorry to see how unhinged he was by what he had gone
through, and I tried to persuade him to eat something, but without
success. He poured himself out a glass of port, and, having drunk it,
again left his chair and stood by the fire, fidgeting with a trembling
hand with the objects on the mantelshelf. Dinner was soon over, and, not
liking to leave Uncle Dominick, I drew a chair over to the fire and sat
down. He did not seem to notice me, but began to pace up and down the
room, stopping now and then by one of the windows as if listening for
sounds outside; but the noisy splashing of the water that fell from a
broken eaveshoot on to the gravel, was all that was to be heard.

“There!" he said at last, in a whisper; “do you hear the wheels? Do you
hear them coming?"

I jumped up and listened too. “No, I can hear nothing."

“I did hear them," he said positively. “I know they are beginning."

I could not understand what he meant, but I went to the nearest window,
and was beginning to unbar the shutters, when there came a loud ring at
the hall-door bell.

“I told you he was coming," my uncle said. “I must get out some brandy
for him after his long drive in the snow."

The hall door was opened, and I heard Roche's voice raised excitedly,
and then the rustle of a mackintosh being thrown off. I ran to the door,
and, opening it, met Willy coming into the room.

His face was all wet with rain, and his hair was hanging in damp points
on his forehead. He took my outstretched hand and shook it, and,
without answering my incoherent questions, walked past me into the room.
My uncle was still standing by the window, holding with one hand to the
heavy folds of the red curtain.

“What! Willy!" he said, coming forward, and staring at Willy with wild
eyes in which frightened conjecture slowly steadied into reassurance.
“Was it you who drove up?" A sort of sob shook his voice. “My dear
boy, I am rejoiced to see you; but, good heavens, how wet you
are!"--going to the sideboard and pouring out a glass of brandy. “Here,
you must drink this at once."

“I don't want it," said Willy; “I don't want anything."

He stood still looking at his father, who, from some cause or other, was
shaking in every limb.

“How did you get up to the house, Willy?" I interposed. “Did you know of
the tree that was blown across the avenue?"

“They told me of it below at the lodge, and I walked from the corner,"
he answered. “I've got something to say to you, sir," he went on,
addressing his father. “You needn't go away, Theo; you might as well
hear it too."

Uncle Dominick lifted the glass of brandy to his lips, and swallowed it
at a gulp.

“Well, my dear boy," he said, with a smile, and in a stronger voice,
“let us hear what you have got to say."

“It's easy told," Willy said, putting his hands into his pockets. “I
went up to Cork on Saturday night, and Anstey Brian followed me this
morning, and I married her there."




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER V.

GOOD-BYE.

    “Since there's no help, come, let us kiss and part."

                       “'Not my pain.
    My pain was nothing; oh, your poor, poor love,
    Your broken love!'"


There was dead silence for some seconds, Uncle Dominick was the first to
break it.

“You married her?" he said slowly, the words falling from his lips like
drops of acid. “You mean to say she is your wife?"

Willy nodded stubbornly.

My uncle stood looking at him, the blood mounting in dark waves to his
pale face, till I should scarcely have known him. He made a stammering
attempt to speak, and moved some steps forward towards Willy, groping
with his hands in front of him as if he were blind, before the words
came.

“Leave the house!" he gasped, in a high, shrill voice--“leave the
house!"--swaying as if shaken by the passion that filled him--“you
infernal, lying scoundrel, or I will kick you out like a dog!"

He stopped again to take breath, but recovering himself caught at the
collar of Willy's coat as if to put his threat into execution.

“You needn't trouble yourself," said Willy, raising his arm and
retreating before his father's onslaught. “You've seen pretty nearly the
last of me now; but, whether you like it or no, I'm going to stay here
for to-night."

Uncle Dominick grasped at the edge of the sideboard to steady himself,
his face so dark and swollen that I thought he was going to have a fit.

“Stay here!" he roared, the full tide of rage breaking from him with
ungoverned savageness. “Stay here! I'll see you damned before you spend
another night in this house!"

“Now, look here," said Willy, in a hard, overbearing voice, keeping his
eyes fixed on his father's face, “it'll be the best of your play to keep
quiet. I'm going to stay here, and that's the end of it!"

His insolent manner appeared to cow my uncle. The colour began to fade
from his face, and his expression became more controlled, though it was
more evil than ever when he spoke next.

“And your bride? May I ask if she has done me the honour of coming
here?" He wiped a thin foam from his lower lip with his trembling hand.
“Or is she perhaps at her father's residence?"

Willy turned his face so that I could not see it. “She's in Cork," he
said.

“I suppose you intend eventually to return here after your honeymoon?"
my uncle went on, with a nasty smile, pouring out and drinking another
glass of brandy, while he waited for Willy's reply.

“I've done with this place for ever," answered Willy steadily, looking
straight at his father. “I married Anstey Brian for a reason that maybe
you know as well as I do."

“What do I know about your reasons for degrading yourself?" interrupted
my uncle, dashing his hand down upon the sideboard with a return of his
first fury. “I only know one thing about her, and that is, that she and
her family shall get no good of their infamous plotting!"--the glasses
on the sideboard clashed and rang as he struck it again. “You shall
never own a stick or a stone of Durrus!" he cried in his harsh, broken
voice. “Your cousin shall have it all--your cousin shall get everything
I have. I will see to that this very night!"

“Oh, all right," Willy answered coolly; “the sooner the better. But I
may as well tell you that if you went down on your knees to me this
minute, I wouldn't touch a halfpenny, nor the value of one that belonged
to you. I've money enough to take me to Australia, and when I go away
to-morrow morning it will be for good and all."

I had up to this stood by a scared and silent spectator; but now I tried
to make my voice heard--

“I won't have it, Uncle Dominick," I said, half choked with my own
eagerness. “It is no use leaving it to me; I won't have your money."

Uncle Dominick took no notice of me at all. He had sat down on the chair
nearest him, his passion having seemingly exhausted his strength, and
his hand on the table beside him shook and twisted as if he had lost all
control over its muscles.

Willy spoke to me for the first time.

“See here, Theo," he said gently, also ignoring my protest, “you'd
better go on upstairs out of this; you can't do any good here." He
glanced at his father. “Do go now, like a good girl; he and I have got
things to settle before I go."

He put his hand on my shoulder, and half pushed me to the door.

“Promise you won't let him do that," I said, trying to hold the door as
he opened it. “Tell him I won't have it."

He did not answer; but, disengaging my fingers from their grasp of the
door, he held them in his for an instant.

“I'll see you again," he said; and then shut the door and left me
standing outside.

I waited for a long time in the drawing-room, but Willy did not come.
Ten and eleven struck; the fire died out, and the candles on the
chimney-piece burned down till the paper which fitted them into their
sockets took fire and began to flare smokily. I went out into the hall
and listened, but could hear no sound of voices. Some one was moving
about upstairs. Perhaps Willy had gone up by the back stairs from the
dining-room. Perhaps he had changed his mind and did not want to see me
after all, I thought, making my way up to my room in unutterable
weariness and despondency.

There was a light under his door when I passed, and I stopped
uncertainly outside. He was dragging boxes about, and opening and
shutting drawers; evidently he was packing. Should I call him? This
would be my last chance of seeing him, as he was going away by the early
train in the morning. But with the thought, the remembrance of Anstey
fell like a shadow between him and me. What could I say to him if I were
to see him? How could I ignore the subject which must be uppermost in
both our minds? And yet, how could I bring myself to speak of it? Most
likely he had felt this same difficulty, and had purposely avoided
meeting me.

I went slowly on from his door, and into my own room, trying to realize
the impossible thought that I had seen the last of Willy. Willy, the
trusty comrade of many a day's careless pleasuring; who had taken me out
schooling and ferreting, and had ransacked every hedge to cut for me
superfluous numbers of the flattest of black-thorns, and the straightest
of ash plants--Willy, with whom I used to gossip and wrangle and chaff
in the easiest of intimacy; who had been, as he himself would have
expressed it, the “best playboy" I had ever known. I could not believe
in this grim ending, that would have been grotesque, if it had not been
so tragical. Willy married to Anstey Brian, and going away for ever
to-morrow morning, and going without even saying good-bye!--these were
things too hard and too sorry to be taken in easily.

A knock came at my door.

“Theo, are you there? Could I see you for a minute?"

I opened the door and went out into the corridor. Willy was standing
there in his shirt-sleeves.

“I heard you coming up," he began quickly, “and I came to say
'Good-bye.'"

“Oh, Willy!" I said wretchedly, “are you really going?"

“Yes; I'm off by the early train," he answered. “It's late now; I won't
keep you up." He put out his hand to me. “Good-bye," he said.

I took his hand, and held it, unable to say a word.

“Good-bye," he repeated, in a whisper.

“Willy," I cried suddenly, “why did you do it? Why did you do it?"

“I can't tell you--I had to. Maybe, some day----" he broke off. “I must
go. Will you say 'Good-bye' to me?"

“I will," I said, carried away by the restrained misery of his voice,
and putting my arms round his neck. “You've been too good to me--oh,
Willy, my dear, I've brought you nothing but bad luck. Good-bye."

I kissed his cheek--he was my only cousin, and I was never going to see
him again--and then I tried to draw myself away from the grasp that was
tightening round me, but it was too late.

“I'll never say 'Good-bye' to you," he said fiercely, straining me to
him. “I won't let you go till you tell me if you meant what you said to
me in the wood. Was it me you cared for, after all?"

“Don't ask me, Willy," I implored. “Let me go!"

“I won't!" he answered, with reckless passion, trying to press his lips
against mine.

I put my hands over my face, with a shrinking which told me in a moment
the depth of the self-delusion which had carried me to the point of
saying I would marry him. He must be told the truth now, no matter what
it cost.

“I meant that I was fond of you," I said; “but I never was in love with
you."

“I see," he said bitterly. He let me go at once. “Then it was Nugent,
after all."

I turned away without answering, but at my own door I stopped, and again
held out my hand.

“Willy," I said, breaking into tears, “say 'Good-bye.'"

He took my hand again, and kissed it softly; he was crying too.

“God help us both!" he said. “Good-bye."

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VI.

A RESOLVE.

    “Sad is my fate; I must emigrate
    To the wilds of Amerikee."
        Old Irish Song.

    “In the fresh fairness of the spring to ride,
     As in the old days when he rode with her."


The postmaster at Rathbarry was evidently not in the habit of
despatching many telegrams. He was now standing in the street,
scratching his red beard, and looking thoughtfully up at the single wire
which dropped from the tarred pole--literally the last outpost of
civilization--down through the roof of his little shop, while I read to
him the message with which I had ridden over early on Tuesday morning.

“You know where Boston is?" I asked, when I had finished; “Boston, in
America, you know?"

“Boyshton, miss?" he said, correcting my pronunciation. “I do, miss.
Sure I think it's there that me sisther's son is a plumber these five
years."

“Well, listen," I said, beginning to read it aloud again, “'To
Farquharson, 16, Charles Street, Boston. Start for Boston February 6th.
THEO.' Are you quite sure you understand it? It is very important."

“No fear at all, miss," he answered, and went into his shop to get my
change.

This was a lengthy proceeding, which involved the sending of a little
girl to the public-house opposite, and an argument, as to the amount to
be returned to me, between Mr. Cassidy, the postmaster, and his
daughter. However, I was in no particular hurry to get back, and
Blackthorn never objected to standing. The day felt more like May than
the second of February. The only tokens of yesterday's rain were the
swollen yellow streams in the gutters on either side of the narrow
street, and the delicate clearness of the sky. It was so enticingly mild
and spring-like, that by the time that Mr. Cassidy had brought me my
change, I had made up my mind to go home by the longer road, instead of
by the usual way round the head of the harbour.

The road I had chosen went past the Clashmore entrance gates, and as I
rode slowly along it, I noticed the ravages which the storm had worked
in The O'Neill's woods. Half-uprooted firs and beeches leaned forlornly
against their neighbours in every direction among the plantations that
sloped to the road, and torn boughs hung over the demesne wall. Near the
big front gates a group of men was collected in the road, where a tree
had, in falling, partly broken down the wall. As I came near, one of
them, a short, square man, detached himself from the others, and,
lifting his hat, walked towards me. To my astonishment I found that it
was O'Neill himself.

“How do you do? I'm delighted to see you," he began effusively. “I see
you're surprised to find me here. I came down from Dublin on Saturday,
to settle some business, and I've been shut up ever since by the storm.
I dare say you've had plenty of it at Durrus?" He hardly waited for my
answer. “And what have you been doing with yourself all this time?" he
went on. “I don't think you look quite the thing--very charming, of
course"--with a wave of his hand--“but still not as blooming as you did
when I saw you last."

“I have been in the house a good deal lately," I answered evasively;
“the weather has been so bad."

“Has Willy come back from Cork yet?" O'Neill asked, turning to look at
where his men were working as he spoke. “I heard that he was there
yesterday."

There was no use in trying to conceal a fact that would soon become
common property.

“Yes," I answered, in a constrained voice, “he came home last night, but
not to stay; he--he went away again this morning."

“Ah!" said O'Neill, still watching the sawing and chopping of the fallen
tree; “has he gone away for long?"

“Yes; I am afraid he has."

“Gone to England, has he?" pursued O'Neill, running his pudgy hand along
my horse's neck.

“No," I replied unwillingly; “at least, I believe he is going there
first."

“Then he is going to emigrate?" O'Neill said quickly, forgetting his
endeavour to appear ignorant, and looking at me through his eye-glass
with undisguised excitement.

I made no answer.

“The fact is," O'Neill went on, clearing his throat, “I heard some
rumour that he had got into trouble; but I hoped it might not have been
true. These people," with a glance at his workmen, “delight in
exaggerating, especially if it is bad news."

Then it had become common property.

“What did they tell you?" I said faintly.

O'Neill's red face got a trifle redder.

“Well, it sounds preposterous, but they had some cock-and-a-bull story
that he had--a--in fact," he said, looking considerately away from me,
“they said he was married."

“It is quite true," I said, with despairing candour; “he has married the
daughter of the man at the lodge, and he--that is to say--they, have
started for Australia."

“God bless my soul!" ejaculated O'Neill. “Dear, dear, how very shocking!
I couldn't believe it when those fellows told me about it this morning.
What a pity it all is--a nice young fellow like that ruining himself in
such a way, and we all thought----" He stopped and stammered, perhaps
becoming aware for the first time of the connection between the news we
were discussing and my pale face and red eyes. “I mean, we had never
anticipated anything of this kind."

I began to gather up my reins preparatory to saying good-bye.

“I hope Madam O'Neill is quite well? I have not heard from Connie for a
long time."

“Oh, quite well--quite well, thank you. I left them in Dublin." Then,
laying his hand on the reins as if impelled by irresistible curiosity,
“I suppose your uncle is very angry with Willy?"

I assented.

“Ah! very naturally; but, upon my soul, I think it was as much his own
fault as any one else's. He never could get on with his own family, you
know. There was your poor father, now--the dearest fellow in the
world--my greatest friend--though, of course, he was a good deal older
than I," O'Neill threw in parenthetically,--“he never hit it off with
him. He hasn't spoken to me for years past because I backed up Owen
when he got into trouble with his father; and there was that other
business about Owen's funeral--a hole and corner affair--no one given
any notice about it, the poor dear fellow buried in Cork as if he were a
pauper!" O'Neill paused, and blew his nose with indignant vigour. “But
all that's neither here nor there," he resumed; “all I mean to say is,
that Dominick was not the man to make the best of a young fellow. That
poor boy Willy never got a chance. He was brought up, as you might say,
among the common people; and, now I come to think of it, we did hear
something of this girl before--but that was before you came, you know.
Ahem!"--he cleared his throat--“it really is most incomprehensible."

“I am afraid I must say good-bye, O'Neill," I said hurriedly, each of
his words giving me a fresh stab; “and I do not know if I shall see you
again, as I am going away on Saturday. I am going back to America."

O'Neill looked as aghast as was possible for a person of his complexion.

“That's the worst news I have heard yet. How can you treat us so
cruelly?" he said gallantly. “You come over and break all our hearts,
and then off you go, and leave us to mend them as best we can."

“I hope it is not as bad as all that," I said, with a sickly smile. “I
won't say good-bye to you now; I am sure I shall see you again before I
go--perhaps at Miss Burke's to-morrow." And I rode quickly away, without
heeding the farewell words that he shouted after me.

To say the truth, I could not face another good-bye, even with O'Neill,
and I trotted home at a good pace along the muddy road, doing my best
to outstrip the associations that every fresh turn in its familiar
windings called up.

There was a note for me on the hall table when I arrived.

“Miss Burke left it herself, miss," said Roche, “and she hopes you'll
send over an answer this afternoon. She wanted to see the masther, but
sure he's not able to see any one--and no wondher, faith, no wondher!"

The note was written on the small coquettish paper, with a golden
“Mimi," engrossed on the corner, which was affected by Miss Burke, and
her good-natured, untidy handwriting had sprawled over all four sides of
the sheet. She said that she “heard that Willy was gone," and, without
making any further comment, she asked me if I would come and stay with
them for as long or as short a time as I might wish. She hoped I would
come to-morrow, if possible, as it was their “at home" day, and I might
meet a few friends; and she remained, mine most affectionately, Mary
Burke.

I considered the matter. It certainly would be a relief to get away from
Durrus and its horrible silence and forsakenness, even for a night or
two. To-day was Tuesday; I did not start till Saturday. If I went over
to Garden Hill to-morrow afternoon, timing my arrival so as to evade the
“few friends," I could stay there till Friday morning. I knew it would
make no difference to my uncle; I could tell him about it when I saw him
at dinner: and I sent a note telling Miss Burke that I should be very
glad to go over to her to-morrow afternoon. But I did not see my uncle
at dinner.

“He's not at all well, miss," Roche said mysteriously. “I was telling
him a while ago that 'tis for the docthor he should send; but indeed, he
was for turning me out of the room when I said it."

“Do you think he would like to see me?"

“Don't go near him at all to-night, miss," Roche answered, with
unexpected urgency. “He'll be betther to-morrow--you'll see him then."

But I did see my uncle again that night. When I went upstairs to bed, I
was startled by seeing his tall figure, in his dressing-gown, standing
outside the door of the room which Willy had locked. He had a large
bunch of keys, and was trying them one after the other in the lock.

“Perhaps you can help me with these," he said, looking round as I came
up to him. “I am almost sure that one of these keys opens this door, but
I cannot find it."

His hand trembled so much, that the keys were shaking and jingling as he
held them out to me.

“I am afraid Willy has got the key----" I began.

“But, my dear, I think it is very probable that we shall find Willy in
that room," he said, in a low confidential voice, pressing the keys upon
me. “I cannot think why he remains in there. I have tried several times
to-day to open the door, but that fellow Roche keeps pestering me. I
believe he is in league with Willy."

My own hand was trembling almost as much as my uncle's, but I did not
dare to refuse to take the keys, and I made a pretence of trying one in
the lock. He watched me anxiously for a moment.

“No, my dear, I see it is no use trying to-night. You are tired, and so
am I"--he sighed deeply, and put his hand to his chest,--“this
oppression that I am suffering from tries me terribly. I will go to my
room and see if I can get a little rest. I need rest sadly."

“Yes, you look very tired," I said, in as ordinary a voice as I could
manage, handing the keys back to him.

“Do I? Well, to tell you the truth, I have been quite unable to sleep
lately. I am so much disturbed by these hackney carmen who make it a
practice to drive past the house at all hours of the night; I hope they
do not annoy you? I have told them several times to go away, but they
simply laugh at me. And the strange thing is," he continued, leaning
over the rail of the corridor and looking suspiciously down into the
hall, “that though that tree is still lying across the avenue, it does
not stop them in the least--they just drive through it. Well, good
night, my dear," he said, nodding at me in a friendly way; “we must
give it up for to-night, but we shall unearth Master Willy to-morrow."

He nodded again, and walked away down the corridor.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VII.

THROUGH THE FRENCH WINDOW.

    “Remorse she ne'er forsakes us;
     A bloodhound staunch, she tracks our rapid step."

                        “A thousand fantasies
     Begin to throng into my memory,
     Of calling shapes and beckoning shadows dire."


When Maggie came into my room next morning, she told me that Dr. Kelly
had been sent for.

“The masther was very bad all the night, and it wasn't daylight when
Misther Roche come down and said Mick should go for the docthor."

I dressed as quickly as I could, and, when I came downstairs, found
that Dr. Kelly was already with my uncle. I rang the bell, and, after an
unusual delay, Roche answered it.

“You had better ask Dr. Kelly to come in to breakfast," I said.

“Very well, miss; he'll be going now in a minute. He's with the masther
in the little study."

“In the little study?"

“Yes, indeed, miss. At four o'clock this morning he lepped out of his
bed, and nothing would do him only to go downstairs; first he was for
going away out of the house down to the bog, or the like o' that, an'
when I was thrying to stop him, he says, 'Let go,' says he,
'Poul-na-coppal is the only place,' says he; 'we'll be late if we don't
go now!' and I was put to me thrumps to howld him."

“Did you tell Dr. Kelly all this?"

“Oh, bedad, I did, miss!" said Roche, with modest pride, “and more too.
There he is now in the hall. I'll go tell him you want to spake to him."

The little doctor's vulgar authoritative voice and complacent manner
inspired me with a certain confidence in him, though what he said about
Uncle Dominick was not very reassuring.

“It's hard enough to say how it'll go with him," he said, sitting down
opposite to me at the breakfast-table. “Yes, thank you, I take three
lumps; I've a very sweet tooth. Of course, he's not as young as he was,
y' know; it's a nasty attack, and his constitution's greatly pulled down
since I saw him last."

Beyond this he did not seem inclined to give an opinion, and began to
tell me about some Shakespeare recitations, in which, it appeared, he
was to take a prominent part. But I reverted to the subject of my
uncle's illness at the first opportunity.

“Oh, never fear, he'll pull round; but we'll have to be very careful of
him," he said, hurrying through his breakfast with practised rapidity.

“He was wandering in his head last night," I said tentatively.

“Oh, I know that, I know that," he replied, rubbing his truculent red
moustache violently with his napkin; “Roche told me all about that."

“Because," I went on, “if you thought there was anything serious, I
would not go over to Garden Hill to-day. Miss Burke asked me to spend a
few days with her," I explained.

“Well, why not?" broke in Dr. Kelly, brusquely. “Now, if you don't mind
me telling you so, it would be the best thing you could do"--screwing
up one small intelligent eye and looking at me observantly. “You just
want a little change, and Roche is well able to mind your uncle"--he
gave his tea-cup a swing to collect what remained of the three lumps
before swallowing its contents. “Well, I must be off now. I'll be at
Miss Burke's meself this afternoon, and I'll call in here again on my
way home. Good morning."

Roche was waiting in the hall, and I heard Dr. Kelly's last words.

“Mind, now, you keep a good eye on him. I'll send over the medicine."

Up to this I had not been able to examine the contents of the post-bag,
and I now went over to the sideboard and shook them out. There was
nothing in it but a circular or two, and a small flat parcel. I turned
over the latter, and saw with a start my own name in Willy's cramped
boyish handwriting. Cutting the string quickly, I found inside another
wrapping of paper, carefully tied up, and sealed with his
well-remembered signet-ring. Under the string a half-sheet of
note-paper, folded in two, had been slipped. There were only a very few
words written in pencil on it.

“I think you have a right to this, and some day I would like you to see
it, but please don't open it till my father is dead. Yours ever, W."

I turned the parcel over and over. It felt like a book with a soft
cover; but why Willy, of all people in the world, should send me a book,
and what it could have to say to Uncle Dominick was more than I could
fathom.

It was no use trying to think about it. Everything lately had gone
beyond my powers of comprehension. I was sick of conjectures, and
exhausted by unexplainable disasters. I would not let myself think of
Willy; it did not bear thinking of, that he was now turning his back on
his own home, for no apparent reason, except the contradictory one that
he had married, contrary to his father's wishes, a girl whom he did not
love. One comfort was, that I also was soon to leave Durrus behind me,
and in my case it would certainly be for ever. Even if Uncle Dominick
had meant anything by his threat of leaving me his property, it did not
make any difference to me. Nothing would induce me to have anything to
say to it. Willy would have to come home and take possession when the
time came, and I would go on living my peaceful uneventful life in the
house in Charles Street with Aunt Jane. That was what it was going to
be, I determined--a placid, unexciting existence; an occasional
classical concert; a literary tea or two; no more dances or
frivolities--I had in the last two or three months grown too old for
them.

I went up to my room and began to get through some preliminary packing
before lunch, and as with a heavy heart I folded up and laid in my trunk
the dresses which I had bought in Boston with such pleasant
anticipations, Aunt Jane's words came back to me with humiliating
force--“I trust you will not have cause to regret the headstrong
self-will which has made you unable to content yourself in a quiet and
God-fearing household."

The morning went quickly by, and, when I had finished packing, I sat
down by the window with an aching back and a hot head, but nevertheless
with satisfaction in the thought that the big trunk which I had just
filled and locked need not be opened again until it had once more taken
up its quarters in the house in Charles Street. Some irrational
sentiment had made me defer the packing of my habit till the last
moment, and when I did at last lay it on the top of my dresses, I
slipped the parcel Willy had sent me into its folds.

I raised the window, and looked out into the mild still air. By this
time next week, Willy and I would both be on the sea, being carried to
opposite ends of the earth, without anything to connect us for the
future, except this parcel, which he had forbidden me to open. It seemed
to me, as I looked out at the woods of Durrus, the place that I was so
fond of, and that yet I almost hated, that it was a true saying--

    “Life is a tale told by an idiot, ...
... signifying nothing."

The sky was dark and sullen, with layers of overlapping clouds roofing
it down to the horizon, and on the lonely sea-stretches there was not so
much as a fishing-boat to be seen. The place was unusually deserted, and
in nothing was Willy's absence more clearly shown than in the fact that
the fallen sycamore was still lying across the bend of the avenue, no
attempt having even been made to cut away the branches. I looked away
from it with a shudder, remembering Uncle Dominick's dreadful
confidences about it the night before, and I wondered how I should
summon up courage enough to go into his room to say good-bye to him. It
seemed unnatural to leave him when he was ill; but I knew very well that
I could be of no real use to him, and the mere thought of another scene
such as that of last night actually made my blood run cold.

A sound of the snapping of twigs made me again look in the direction of
the fallen tree, and I saw that a woman, whom I soon recognized as being
Moll Hourihane, was breaking away some of the smaller branches, and
making them into a bundle for firewood. It was the first time I had ever
seen her occupy herself rationally, or that I had been able to watch her
in unobserved security, and my eyes followed her movements with a
fascinated curiosity as she made herself a large bundle, and, having
hoisted it on to her back with surprising ease, crossed the grass
between the house and the drive, and walked along close under the
windows until she reached the end one, which was the French window of my
uncle's study. She stood for a moment or two outside, looking in, and
then drew her hand once or twice down the glass.

I had leaned as far out of my window as was possible, and I now called
out to her, “Go away! You will disturb the master. Go away at once!"

She drew back from the window, and looked up, shading her eyes with her
hand, to see where my voice had come from. She soon saw me, and I again
motioned to her to go away. Instead, however, of doing so, she stood
quite still, and throwing back her head, she fell into a sort of
paroxysm of voiceless laughter, pointing at me, and rolling her head
from shoulder to shoulder. Seeing that she paid no attention to what I
said to her, I was on the point of leaving the window to go and look for
Roche, when the French window was opened, and Roche himself came out,
and with a torrent of abuse, delivered in voluble Irish, he drove her
away.

“The divil's cure to her!" I heard him say to himself as she retreated,
“coming frightening the masther like that!"

“Roche," I called, “how is the master?"

“Oh, a dale betther, miss," he replied, coming under my window. “He was
quite aisy till that owld one came with her ugly face at the window. But
sure you can see him to-day before you go; he's quite composed in his
mind. He was asking for yourself just now."

In order to be quite sure of missing most of Miss Burke's friends, I had
not ordered the trap till half-past four, and I put off going to see
Uncle Dominick until about a quarter of an hour before the time I was to
start. At the door of his study I met Roche coming out.

“Go in, miss; he's getting on first-class. I'll have a cup of tay ready
for you agin you're coming out," he said, opening the door for me.

My uncle was standing by the window, with a book in his hand. He gave a
quick glance at me as I came in.

“Yes, they are capital prints," he said, as if in continuance of a
conversation. “I am glad you have come. There is very little light left;
but if you will come to the window, I will show them to you."

He had on the long Paisley shawl dressing-gown which he had worn the
night before; his figure looked immensely tall against the dull light;
and his high bowed shoulders, with his head sunk on his chest, gave him
the appearance of some forlorn sick raven.

“I have come to say good-bye to you for a day or two," I said, going
over to the window. “I am going over to the Burkes'."

“Well, you will have time to look at this book before you go," he
answered, turning over its leaves with a sort of suppressed eagerness.
“This now, do you remember showing me this?" He held the book towards
me, and I saw that it was the old volume of “The Turf, the Chase, and
the Road," which my father had given him, and he and I had once before
looked over together. “That is a long time ago now."

“Yes," I replied, glad to find that he was so easy to talk to; “I can
hardly believe that it is only three months since I came."

He looked fearfully ill and wasted; he was shaking from head to foot,
and his restless, bloodshot eyes kept wandering from the book to the
trees outside. Whatever Dr. Kelly might say, I was certain that he was
much worse than he had even been last night. I could not pretend to
myself that I was fond of him; but after all, now that Willy was gone,
I was practically the only relation he had left in the world, and I felt
more and more that it would be heartless of me to go away and leave him
in such a state.

He did not appear to notice what I had said, and I went on--

“I don't really care about going to the Burkes' in the least, Uncle
Dominick. I would quite as soon stay with you, if you would like me to."

“Stay with me! What do you mean?" he said, with some surprise, slipping
the book into the wide pocket of his dressing-gown. “You only came last
night--or was it the night before?--and, of course, you must stay. You
will have to attend the old man's funeral. You know"--with a low
laugh--“they all think that you were buried in Cork; but you're not, you
know--you're not."

He had laid his trembling hand on my wrist to emphasize what he said,
and I was afraid to move.

“No, do not go," he went on, his voice getting more and more hurried. “I
want you to see about that fallen tree. They cannot possibly get the
hearse up to the door while it is there. Why are you looking so
frightened, Owen? She is not here. You know, you were very ill when you
came, and I had to get her to look after you. She was looking in
through the window a little time ago; but Roche hunted her away, and she
can't do you any harm now."

I was almost too terrified by this time to be able to conceal my fear;
but I said, as calmly as I could--

“I am not afraid of her. I think it is time for me to go now; let me
send Roche to you."

“No, no!" he whispered anxiously, clutching my wrist more tightly, “he
knows nothing about it; he wasn't here. No one knows but Mary Hourihane,
and it was all her fault. Owen!" he cried, his voice rising
hysterically, “don't stare at me! I declare to God I never did anything
to you until she came in and asked me to help her to take
you--there--out through that window--out to Poul-na-coppal." He dragged
me from the window into the dark corner by the fireplace. “Hide there!
Be quick! lest she should see you!" he panted, his teeth chattering, and
the perspiration breaking out on his forehead. “I hear her coming. There
she is!" fixing frenzied eyes on the wall opposite. “Look at the
bog-mould on her hands. She says she did it for my sake! Don't let her
come near me; she will put her arms round my neck, and I shall die!" He
let go my hand, and made a rush to the window. “She is out there too!"
he said, with an awful cry, turning back and cowering again in the
corner by the fireplace; “and there--and there; she is everywhere! Don't
leave me, Owen!"

But his appeal did not stop me in my flight from the room for help.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER VIII.

POUL-NA-COPPAL.

    “The rose-winged hours that flutter in the van
     Of Love's unquestioning, unrevealèd span--
     Visions of golden futures; or that last
     Wild pageant of the accumulated past
     That clangs and flashes for a drowning man."

    “Wenn ich in deine Augen seh
     So schwindet all' mein Leid und Weh."


I am not very clear as to what happened next, Mrs. Rourke told me
afterwards that I had burst into the kitchen with “a face on me like
death," only able to say, “The master--go to the master!"

After that, I suppose I somehow made my way to the drawing-room, as I
next remember walking to and fro between the window and the fireplace,
with a confused feeling that by doing so I should steady my whirling
brain.

He had called me “Owen." He had mistaken me, in his madness or delirium,
for his dead brother--a mistake which my strong likeness to my father
made easy to understand; but neither madness nor delirium could account
for all he had said. “You were very ill when you came." “They all think
that you're buried in Cork; but you're not, you know!" “I declare to God
I never did anything to you." “She asked me to help her to take
you--there--out through that window."

What had all this meant? He certainly believed he was speaking to my
father. If I could only think it out quietly! What had Moll Hourihane to
say to my father, and what had she done to him that he should be afraid
of her?

Then he had spoken of “the old man's funeral"--my grandfather's funeral.
How, even in his ravings, could he have forgotten that his brother died
two or three days before his father? It was no use; I could not think it
out. I must wait until my brain was calmer, till my thoughts had ceased
to reel and spin. I was only groping in the dark--in a darkness from
whose depths one persistent idea was thrusting itself at me like a
sword.

The distant sound of wheels on the drive reminded me that it was past
the time at which I was to start for Garden Hill. I hastily resolved to
wait and see Dr. Kelly before going there, and I rang the bell in order
to send a message to that effect out to the yard. No one answered it for
some time, but at length the door opened. I was standing by the fire,
with my elbows on the mantel-shelf and my forehead in my hands, and,
hearing a bashful murmur in Maggie's voice, I said, without turning
round--

“Tell Tom I shall not want the trap until I send for it."

The door closed, but footsteps advanced into the room.

“Well, what is it?" I said wearily, taking down my arms.

There was no answer, and, turning round, I found myself face to face
with Nugent.

I looked at him stupidly, without taking the hand which he had
conventionally held out to me. He drew it back quickly.

“How do you do?" he said very stiffly. “Miss Burke asked me to leave a
message for you on my way home. She hopes you do not forget that she
expects you this afternoon. She thought you would have been with her at
tea time.

“I could not go," I answered, without moving.

“Miss Burke desired me to say that you were not to disappoint her,"
going on conscientiously with his message, “as Dr. Kelly had told her
there was no necessity for your staying with Mr. Sarsfield."

“My uncle has been much worse. I must wait and see Dr. Kelly."

My lips were stiff and cold, and I moved them with difficulty. It did
not occur to me to ask him to sit down; my only wish was that he should
go away while I was still able to keep up the semblance of an ordinary
demeanour. He looked at me for a moment.

“I am very sorry to hear that Mr. Sarsfield is worse. Miss Burke had no
idea of that when she sent the message."

“I do not know when I shall be able to go to her. Perhaps never!"

The last words forced themselves out against my will; he must see now
that something was wrong. Why did he not go?

“Is there any message I can give Miss Burke for you? If I could be of
any use----" he began, less formally than he had hitherto spoken.

“No, thank you; nothing," I answered, still standing motionless.

There was a brief pause. Nugent glanced at the clock, and then again
looked at me. He hesitated for a moment, as if waiting for me to speak;
then, finding I did not do so, he picked up his gloves from the table by
which he was standing.

“I think I must say good afternoon now," he said, this time without
offering to shake hands with me. “I hope there will be a better account
of your uncle to-morrow before I start. I have only come down for a day
about some business."

I did not attempt any reply, and he left the room.

The stress was over, and, after an instant, I wondered why it had been
so great. It was a long time now since I had thought myself near
breaking my heart about him; when he came in, it had not so much as
beaten faster. I had felt stunned, but it was only by the shock of
seeing him again at such a moment. Now I assured myself that I was glad
he had come and taken my thoughts for a little time from those ghastly
ravings of my uncle. Seeing him had been a kind of assurance that things
were going on in the usual way, and that I was not living in a
nightmare. I was sorry that I had not taken his hand; by not doing so I
must have given him a false impression, and I even wished now that he
had stayed longer. In a few minutes I should have lost that feeling of
faintness, and have been able to talk naturally to him.

The drawing-room had become very dark. I felt as if I were the only
creature alive in the house, and Uncle Dominick's words were again
beginning to crowd back with new and insistent suggestion. I would not
stay indoors any longer. There was still some daylight, and it would be
better to wait outside in the fresh air till Dr. Kelly came.

I walked down the drive till I came to the fallen tree. I was more weak
and shaken than I had believed, and I sat down on one of the great limbs
that had sprawled along the ground. There was a heavy silence in the
air; the sky was low and foreboding, and a watery streak of yellow lay
along the horizon behind the bog. A rook rustled close over my head,
with a subdued croak; I watched him flying quietly home to the tall elms
by the bog gate. He was still circling round them before settling down,
when a sound struck on my ear. I sprang to my feet and listened. It had
come from the bog; and now it rose again, a loud, long cry, the cry of a
woman keening. Every pulse stood still as I heard it, and I held to a
branch of the tree for support, as the wail grew and spread upon the
air.

Some one came down the steps of the French window of my uncle's study,
and ran across the grass towards me, and I recognized Roche in the
twilight.

“Did ye see him?" he called out. “Did he pass this way?"

“Who?" I answered, starting forward.

“The masther--the masther!" he cried, and then stopped as the keen rose
again from the bog. “God save us, what's that? 'Tis from the bog--'twas
the bog he was talking of all day! Run, miss, run, for the love of God!"

I hardly waited to hear what he said, but ran for the bog gate as I have
never run before or since. The air was full of the crying; the pantings
of my breath made it beat in waves in my ears, as I came along under the
trees. The gate was wide open, and I could see no one in the gloom ahead
of me as I blindly followed the sound along the rough cart track. I
strained my eyes in the direction it came from, running all the time,
and I soon saw, or thought I saw, against the pale light of the sky, a
figure down in the bog to my right. I made for it, stumbling and
tripping among the tussocks of heather and grass-grown lumps of peat,
once, in my reckless haste, falling over a great piece of bogwood that
stood out of the soft ground. The figure was that of a woman, who was
kneeling, keening and wringing her hands, on the farther side of the
black Poul-na-coppal, by which I had once seen Moll Hourihane, and,
hurrying with what speed I could round its broken, shelving edge, I
found that the surging thought which had grown during my run into an
unreasoning conviction had been right--the woman was Moll herself.

That she, who was supposed to be unable to utter a sound, should be
making this outcry did not then strike me as strange.

“Where is the master?" I said breathlessly. “What are you crying for?"

For all answer, she flung her arms high over her head, and extended them
both with a frantic gesture downwards, towards the water, and then fell
again to clapping her hands and beating her breast. At the same moment
the irregular fall of footsteps sounded in the road, and I called out
with all the strength left to me. At my voice, Moll's crying, which had
ceased as I first spoke to her, broke out anew; but I paid no heed to
her, and taking a step forward, peered with a sick terror down at the
inky gleam of water in the bog hole. It was quite still, but water was
dripping from a plant of bog myrtle that hung out over the edge, and,
putting my hand on it, I found it was all wet, as if it had been
splashed.

The voices of the men were close to me; I staggered back to meet them,
and sank down on the ground as Tom came up to me.

“Did you find him, miss? Is he here?"

“He's there," I said wildly; “ask Moll! He has killed himself!"

My face was turned toward the road, and as I spoke I saw near me on the
dark ground a glimmer of something white that did not look like a stone.
I dragged myself towards it. It was a book lying open, a book with
pictures, and, dark as it was, I recognized the outlines of one of them,
“The Regulator on Hertford Bridge flat."

It was the book which I had seen my uncle put into his pocket. I did not
want any more proof of what had happened, and letting the book fall, I
covered my face with my hands and lay prone in the heather. Moll's
keening had stopped altogether; footsteps hurried past, and I heard
excited voices in every direction round me.

“Get ropes and a laddher!"

“Yerrah, what use is that, man? There's twenty foot of mud in the
bottom! Go get a boat-hook."

“'Twas in here he jumped whatever. Do ye see the marks of his feet?"

Then Roche's voice, in broken explanation--

“He was cowld, and I wasn't out of the room three minutes getting the
hot jar an' blankets, an' whin I got back, he was gone out the window!"

“Well?" said another voice.

“I ran to Miss Theo, who was sitting below at the three," went on Roche;
“an' we heard the screeching, an' we run away down----"

“Where's Miss Sarsfield now?" said the first voice imperatively.

I knew the voice now; the ground rocked and heaved under me, flashes
came and went before my eyes, and for an instant the voices and
everything else melted away from me.

When my senses came back to me, I felt that I was being lifted and
carried in some one's arms, but by whom I did not know.

“Put me down," I murmured; “I am able to walk."

I was placed gently on my feet.

“All right now; I'll take Miss Sarsfield home," said Nugent's voice: “go
back and help Dr. Kelly. Can you come on now?" he asked, “we are not far
from the gate, and my trap is close to it."

I tried to answer him, but my voice was almost gone, and my knees shook
under me when I made a step forward. He put his arm round me without a
word, and, supported by it, I managed to get as far as the bog gate, but
there my strength failed me.

“I am afraid I cannot go any farther," I said, tottering to the low bank
beside the road, and sinking down on it. “Please don't trouble about
me."

He sat down beside me, and, putting his arm round me again, drew my head
down on to his shoulder.

“Why did you send me away from you?" he said, bending his face close to
mine.

“I don't know," I whispered, trembling.

“Must I go away now, my darling?"

I said nothing, but in the soft darkness his lips met mine, and in a
moment all the grief and horror of the last week slipped away from
me--everything was lost in the long forgetfulness of a kiss.

[Illustration: text decoration]




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER IX.

A HERITAGE OF WOE.

    “Love that was dead and buried, yesterday
     Out of his grave rose up before my face."

    “Not by appointment do we meet delight and joy--
     They heed not our expectancy;
     But, at some turning in the walks of life,
     They on a sudden clasp us with a smile."


It was Friday afternoon, two days since the evening when Nugent had
driven me away from Durrus to Garden Hill. The sun was shining into Miss
Burke's drawing-room, and through the window I caught occasional
glimpses of Miss Burke herself in her garden, examining the hotbed,
standing with arms akimbo to direct the operations of the garden boy, or
ejecting an errant Plymouth Rock, that had daringly flown over the
fuchsia hedge into the garden from the yard.

“Do you remember that afternoon when you said good-bye to Willy out
there?" I said, looking round at Nugent, as Miss Burke slammed the
garden gate on the intruder. “I was there by the henhouse all the time."

“Yes, I knew you were--I was watching you out of the window while I was
being talked to by Miss Croly."

“Then why did you say what you did about America to Willy? You must have
known I could hear."

“I wanted you to hear. I thought then that you had treated me very
badly. In fact, I am not at all sure that I don't think so still."

I left the window in which we were standing, and went back to the
armchair which Mrs. Barrett had once so abundantly filled.

“I want to ask you something," I said; “what was it--why--I mean, what
made you write me that letter?"

“Because, under the circumstances, it was about the only thing for me to
do"--in a tone which told of past indignation. “I was warned off!"

“I never warned you," I said, trying to appear absorbed in studying the
figures on the Japanese screen that I was holding.

“No, I dare say you did not; but it came to pretty nearly the same thing
when you got your uncle to do it for you."

“I! I never did anything of the kind!"

“But your uncle himself told me----" he began, and stopped.

“Told you what?" I said, sitting bolt upright.

“Well," he answered reluctantly, “that last day I was at Durrus--after
the ball, you know--your uncle sent for me, and he told me you were
engaged to Willy."

“I engaged to Willy!" I cried hotly. “How could he have----"

The words died on my lips; I could not now dispute about anything Uncle
Dominick had said.

“He said more than that," said Nugent, coming and standing over me; “he
said he thought--he was pretty sure, in fact--that you wanted me to know
it" (reddening at the recollection), “and so then, of course----"

It was a hard thing to hear. The falsehood had come near spoiling both
our lives, and with the thought of it the remembrance of the time that
was over came like a wave about me--the wretchedness and bewilderment,
the heart-ache and the hidden strivings with it, the effort for Willy's
sake. I looked up into the troubled blue eyes that were fixed on mine,
and, with such a reaction from pain as comes seldom in a life, I
stretched out both my hands.

“Oh, Nugent," I said, calling him by his name for the first time, “why
did you believe it?"

He took hold of my hands, and knelt down beside me. “I think," he said,
in a low voice, “because I loved you so much."

I could not now say more than this, even to Nugent. Uncle Dominick had
only been buried this morning, and all that had happened that last
afternoon was still fresh in my mind. They had recovered his body from
the bog hole the same night, after long searching, and a telegram had
been sent to try and catch Willy before he started. But it had been too
late; he and Anstey had sailed for Melbourne a few hours before the
telegram had gone, and now a second message had been sent to Melbourne
to await his arrival there. There had been very few at the funeral,
Nugent said; he and his father, and old Mr. McCarthy, the solicitor, and
Dr. Kelly, who had conducted the inquest, were, with the Durrus
servants, the only people there.

“They went by the old road across the bog," he said, in answer to a
question from me. “It was a lovely morning, just like spring. I looked
at Poul-na-coppal as we walked past, and you can see at once that
something unusual has happened there. The banks are all muddy and
trampled, and the heather and bog myrtle that used to grow round it are
torn and broken down. You wouldn't know it."

“Not know Poul-na-coppal! I wish I could think I should ever forget it."

“They had had the mausoleum opened," Nugent went on. “I can just
remember seeing it open before, when I was six years old, and they took
me to old Theodore's funeral--by way of a treat. It's an awful old
place."

“Oh, Nugent," I said, “was Moll Hourihane there?"

“No, I hear she has gone off her head altogether, and just sits by the
fire and says 'Gibber' all the time--or words to that effect."

“Nonsense!"

“Well, that is what your friend Tom told me. I was quite glad to hear
that she was turning into a good conventional idiot, after all."

“Was old Brian there?"

“Yes; he had the cheek to ask me if I knew who was to get the property.
He is as ill-conditioned an old ruffian as I ever saw. I told him that
till the will was read, no one knew anything about it."

“I hope your father went up to the house to hear it," I said, with an
uneasy recollection of my uncle's threat to disinherit Willy in my
favour.

“I have not the least doubt he did--in fact, I believe McCarthy asked
him to do so; but as I knew it could be of no special interest to any
one but Willy, I came right on here. It seemed to me as if I would
prefer it."

Miss Mimi's gardening occupied her till nearly tea time; at least it was
not till then that we heard her voice reverberating in the hall.

“See now, Joanna, be sure and put plenty of butter on the toast, and
don't wet the tea till I ring the bell. The mistress and Miss Bessie
will be home from Moycullen soon, and"--in a lower voice--“there's Miss
Sarsfield and Mr. O'Neill in the drawing-room."

Here there came a ring at the bell.

“Mercy on us! who's this?" exclaimed Miss Burke; “and me in me awful old
gardening clothes!"

We heard her hastily retreat into the room opposite, and then, in a
muffled voice, issue her directions.

“Say I'm not at home, Joanna, and Miss Sarsfield's not able to see any
one!"

“Good woman," murmured Nugent.

The door was opened, and Joanna's steadfast assertions that “all the
ladies were out of home," were reassuringly audible; but the next
instant we heard Miss Mimi emerge from her refuge, and shamelessly
betray her confederate.

“Don't mind Joanna, O'Neill! Come in, come in! I never thought it was
you!"

“How do you do, Miss Burke?" said O'Neill; “I am glad you are not as
inhospitable as Joanna!" Here followed an apologetic giggle from Joanna,
and O'Neill continued. “And how is your guest? Better, I hope."

“Oh, the poor child! She was awfully bad yesterday; she never lifted her
head from the pillow all day. I think some one was greatly disappointed
when he came to inquire! But come in and see her; she's in the
drawing-room."

O'Neill's manner when he came in, was, I at once felt, somewhat shorn of
its usual intimate devotedness, and I discerned in it a certain striving
after a paternal tone. He shook my hand with a pressure and a shake of
his head, that were meant to convey at once a facetious reproach and
forgiving congratulation, and as soon as possible took advantage of the
cover afforded to him by Miss Burke's appropriate witticisms, and, after
a word or two, left my side. Miss Mimi's exuberant enthusiasm soon
became a trifle wearying to the objects of it, and although O'Neill
gallantly seconded her, I think he was as glad as either Nugent or I
when the return of Mrs. Burke and Miss Bessie, and the arrival of tea,
caused a diversion.

Soon afterwards, however, he again came up to where I was sitting.

“I want to say a word or two to you, my dear Miss Theo," he said. I
guessed that they would be on the subject which I most dreaded, but
which was, I knew, inevitable. “It is about that sad business," he went
on, drawing his chair up to mine; “very deplorable it has all been--very
shocking--and so trying for you! And how fortunate that Nugent turned
back that evening with Kelly! He says he scarcely knows why he did; but
I dare say it is not impossible to imagine his reason!"--with a
temporary relapse from the paternal tone. “However, what I wanted to say
to you was this; when your uncle's papers were searched to-day, two
wills were found, one of comparatively old standing, in Willy's favour,
and the other--well, you can hardly call it a will--was dated only a few
days ago--the first of this month,--it was quite incomplete, neither
finished nor signed, but in it it was clear that his intention had been
to leave everything he possessed to you. Unluckily, for want of the
signature, it is perfectly valueless----" He broke off, and stuck his
eye-glass into his eye in order to observe me more intently.

“I am very glad," I said in a low voice. “I would not have taken it."

“Well, you see, it was only to be expected that he should want to punish
Willy for that outrageous marriage of his. Upon my word, I should have
done the same if Nugent had done anything of the kind--or, I may say, if
he hadn't done precisely what he has done!"

I paid no attention to O'Neill's implied compliment.

“Poor Willy!" I said, more to myself than to him; “no matter what the
will had been, I would never have taken what ought to have been his."

“Ah! that's all very nice and kind and romantic," said O'Neill, wagging
his head sapiently, “but you ought to remember that your father was the
eldest son, and that it was only by what you might call a fluke that he
did not inherit. I always thought that it was a wonderful stroke of luck
for Dominick, old Theodore's outliving your father. Why, if Owen had
held out a couple of days longer, Durrus would be yours this minute! It
certainly was an iniquitous thing," he went on, in a wheezy, indignant
whisper, “that your grandfather never took the trouble to find out
anything about Owen--where he was, if he was married and had any
children, and all that kind of thing. But not a bit of it! If Owen
survived him, well and good, he got the property; but if he didn't,
Dominick was to have it--no reference made to Owen's possible
heirs--nothing! Upon my soul, it puts me in a passion whenever I think
of it!"

O'Neill pulled out his handkerchief, and began to polish his heated
countenance.

I did not answer. While he was speaking, that idea which had haunted me
since my last meeting with my uncle again thrust itself into my mind,
and I began to feel that there might have been a motive for such a
tragedy as had been shadowed in his ravings. I could not sit here with
those loud, cheerful voices round me, and O'Neill's red, interested face
opposite to me. I knew he was expecting me to speak, but I could not
find words to do so. It was vain to look to Nugent to interpose, as he
was with difficulty holding his own against the combined assault of Mrs.
Burke and her two daughters, who were delightedly making him the
occasion to parade venerable jests that had seen hard service in many a
previous engagement.

“It was a funny thing now, Willy's marrying that girl. D'ye know had he
any notion of his father's intentions?" began O'Neill again, hitching
his chair still closer to mine with the evident intention of starting a
long and satisfactory discussion.

I had been rapidly forming various schemes of escape, but I was spared
having to carry out any of them by the timely intervention of Joanna,
who at this juncture appeared at the door and announced that “Misther
Roche had brought over Miss Sarsfield's luggages from Durrus, and would
be thankful to speak to her in the hall."

As I crossed the room, Nugent followed me.

“What's the matter?" he whispered. “You look regularly tired out."

“I am going to speak to Roche," I answered. “Will you come with me?"

The first object that I saw in the hall was the Saratoga trunk which I
had packed for America, and my other luggage was blocking up the narrow
passage. The sight of the big trunk recalled to me the day that I had
packed it, and a sudden thought of Willy's parcel came to me. He had
said that I was not to open it till after his father's death, but that
then, for his own sake, he would like me to see it. Perhaps it would
throw some light on all these mysteries that had thickened round me
since I had made the experiment of this visit to Ireland. I could hardly
wait to talk to poor old Roche, and to listen to his lamentations over
the downfall of the Durrus family. I was burning to open my trunk and
see what must be, as far as Willy was concerned, the final word on the
subject. At last Roche had said all he had to say. I sent him down to
the kitchen to have a consolatory cup of tea with Joanna, and then,
with Nugent's help, I eagerly unbuckled the heavy straps and unlocked my
trunk. There, on the top of all, lay my habit, and, with a very shaking
hand, I drew out of its folds the little brown paper parcel.

We took it into the dining-room, where we should be free from
interruption.

“Will you open it?" I said, sitting down by the table, and trying to
prepare myself for whatever fresh revelation was coming.

Nugent cut the string and took the paper off.

“It's a book of some kind," he said, sitting down beside me. “It looks
like a diary. And here is a letter for you, from Willy, I suppose."

“Give it to me," I said breathlessly. “And will you see what the book is
about?"

The letter was a long one, and was written from Foley's Hotel, Cork.


                                        “Tuesday afternoon, February 2nd.

     “MY DEAR THEO" (it began),

        “I found this book in the room next yours the morning I went to
     nail up the door. When I went down after that to the lodge to abuse
     Brian about letting Moll up to the house, he threatened me in what
     I thought a queer way. While I was there Moll came in, and when she
     saw me, she tried to hide a book she had in her hand. I just saw
     the cover of it, and I knew it was the one I had picked up that
     morning and left down in my own room. I took it from her, and when
     I was coming home I looked at it. Then I knew right enough what old
     Brian had been driving at. You'll see for yourself when you read
     it.

     “All the same, I know now that the biggest part of the fault was
     Moll's, though that time I didn't think so. Anyhow, I knew that my
     father had swindled you, and that if what I thought was true, I
     hadn't a right even to speak to you; and I thought the only way out
     of it was to do what I knew would make the governor leave the
     property away from me. Besides, Brian knew, and he told me plain
     enough, that if I did not do what he wanted, he would disgrace my
     father and all the family. But I wouldn't have minded that so much
     only for the thought of its being your father, and thinking that it
     was mine who had robbed him, and worse. But, as I told you before,
     it was really Moll who did it. She thought she'd square things for
     the governor, and that then, maybe, he'd marry her. He told me that
     himself. She was so sold then when he wouldn't do it, that it, and
     everything else, sent her off her head. That room she used to be in
     was your father's, and I hear now she used to be playing there all
     the time with the little book. I suppose she knew somehow that it
     was his, and the servants never noticed one way or the other.

     “I will never forget what you did for me. I was very near shooting
     myself that afternoon after you were talking to me in the
     plantation, but I thought that would only make it worse for you.

     “This is the longest letter I ever wrote, and now I have no more to
     tell you. We will be starting for London directly, and we sail
     to-morrow. Maybe before you open this you will have heard from me
     again. Anyhow, don't forget me.

                                                 “WILLY.

     “P.S.--You see now that you're bound to take the property."




[Illustration: text decoration]

CHAPTER X.

LEX TALIONIS.

    “And now Love sang; but his was such a song,
     So meshed with half-remembrance hard to free."


The tears crept to my eyes, and, standing there unshed, blurred the
closely written lines, as I read them, and heard in every sentence
Willy's voice telling me the miserable story. Nugent was still turning
over the leaves of the book when I finished the letter.

“I can't make this out," he said. “It is a diary of your father's for
the year 185--, and the curious thing is that it seems from it that he
died at Durrus instead of in Cork."

“Here," I said helplessly, handing him the letter, “read this, and tell
me what it all means."

He put the diary into my hand, but half drew it back again.

“You ought not to look at it," he said. “You're not fit to stand all
this trouble."

“I must see it," I said agitatedly. “Don't stop me, Nugent."

He still held my hand, with the book in it.

“Listen!" I said in a whisper. “I have something to tell you."

I had been burdened longer than I could bear with the dread of the
possible meaning of those strange things that my uncle had said in his
delirium, and now by the light of Willy's letter, all these broken
sentences were beginning to shape and group themselves into something
that could be understood. I did not wait to think, or to try and
arrange coherently what I was going to say, but with a feeling of
feverish hurry driving me, I told Nugent everything that I could think
of that bore in any way on my father's death. It was not easy to tell,
and towards the end of my story my voice began to fail me.

“Never mind, my darling," he said, putting his arm close round me,
“don't think of it any more."

“I can't think of anything else," I said, unclasping his hand from mine,
and putting the letter into it. “Read this."

He read it, and, without speaking, took up the diary again.

“I believe I understand it all now," he said. “There is very little in
the diary, but there is enough to make it pretty clear what happened. Do
you see here; your father got to Cork on the 9th of January, and instead
of dying on that day, as is said on the brass in the church, he did not
even start for Durrus till the 10th. I will read it to you, and you will
understand it for yourself.

“'January 9.--Arrived in Cork. Felt very ill. Wrote to Helen, also to
Dominick, telling him to expect me to-morrow. Weather very cold.

“'January 10.--Felt too ill to leave by early train. Came by the six
o'clock instead. Got to Carrickbeg at nine p.m. Did not see any one I
knew. Got outside car. Very cold night; snow. Arrived Durrus one a.m.
Found that my father had died this afternoon. Feel very ill myself. Am
in my old room over hall-door.

“'January 11.--Did not get up. Fear I have a touch of pleurisy. Wish
Helen were here. D. has only once been in to see me, and there seems to
be no one to attend to me. Have asked the woman to light a fire in my
room, but she has not done so. D. tells me she is the only servant in
the house. He says the property has been nearly ruined in the famine.
Must write to Helen to-morrow about coming here.'"

This was the last entry in the book, and Nugent had some difficulty in
reading it, as the writing was weak and the ink had faded. The pages
were rubbed and soiled, and the leaves were dog's-eared, but none had
been torn out, and, considering its age and the ill-usage it had
probably received, the book was in very good condition.

“You see," Nugent said, when he had finished reading, “your father
certainly survived your grandfather, and it is very easy to see why your
uncle was anxious for people to believe the contrary. He knew your
mother was a long way off, and that there was no one here to ask any
inconvenient questions. The famine had made most people leave the
country. I believe my father was the only person who made any trouble
about it."

“Yes, yes," I said excitedly, remembering my meeting with O'Neill on the
way home from Rathbarry; “he said something to me about it once. Go on."

“Well," went on Nugent, with, as I now think, some pride and pleasure in
the office of elucidator, “as a matter of fact, your father probably
died on the 11th or 12th, and I must say it looks as if there had been
some foul play about it. Your uncle's object was of course to settle
things so as to be able to assert that your father had died before your
grandfather, and had been buried in Cork. I haven't a doubt that he and
Moll managed to get his body out through that French window, and that
then they carried it between them to Poul-na-coppal, and put it in
there, where they knew it would never be found or thought of."

“Oh, that explains----" I began; but Nugent was now too interested in
what he was saying to stop.

“Of course, he may have died naturally, but I am bound to say I don't
think he did. I should say that that old madwoman was quite capable,
then, of putting a pillow over a sick man's face, if she had any reason
for doing so----"

“Stop!" I cried, interrupting him. “I remember now that I thought she
wanted to do that very thing to me, the night she came into my room."

Nugent's clear exposition broke down.

“My darling," he said, catching me in his arms again, “I don't know how
you ever lived through that awful time, all alone, with no one to stand
by you; and to think that if I hadn't been fool enough to believe that
old blackguard----"

“Don't say anything against him," I said, rather indistinctly, by reason
of my face being hidden in the collar of his coat. “It's all over now,
and I shouldn't mind anything--only for poor Willy. You must write to
him. Tell him that nothing would ever induce me to have Durrus, if it
was mine fifty times over; tell him that for my sake he must abide by
his father's will, and not waken up a thing that is over now and done
with; tell him that I beg of him to come home again----"

“I'll do nothing of the sort," said Nugent, lifting my face and looking
suspiciously into it. “I believe you cared a great deal more about Willy
than you ever did for me."

“I don't know why I didn't," I answered, midway between laughter and
tears. “He was a thousand times nicer to me than you were--but, somehow,
I always liked you best."


                               THE END.