NEIL MUNRO
THE NEW ROAD


CHAPTER I.

THE DOVECOTE TOWER.


With the down for the first time shaved from his face, young Æneas stood
in the draughty passage, turning his cocked hat in his hands till the
nap had a cow's-lick on it. Chagrin it was that kept the tutor fidgeting
outside the door of the study, where at this hour he ought by rights to
have a couple of pupils on the march with him and Cæsar's sturdy lads
through Gaul. It is one of the solemn days in life for a man when he
starts to use a razor: now that the curly down was gone, and Æneas had
seen in his glass a youth as boyish as he always shamefully felt himself
to be, he rued the rash act that seemed to rob him in a moment of his
manhood. He had come for the evening lesson with his pupils, feeling
somewhat like a man half-naked in a dream, but, like the usual dreamer
in these circumstances, hopeful no one might observe his own confusion
at the absence of a beard—a small one at the best: he had come prepared
at most for the bantering of Margaret Duncanson, eager to have it past;
and now the skirmish was postponed! That was to make a double call upon
his courage, and the supply he had flogged up for this rencounter was
already vanished—gone from the field in a shameful rout, and the enemy
not yet in sight.

Feeling that new-recovered velvet chin of his with nervous fingers, he
stood in the dark of the lobby swithering what he should do next. The
house was full of the smell of celery; Drimdorran had some curious
Lowland whims, and dined at the hour of four from the first day he
became a laird; faint rumours of the kitchen wafted up the stairs at
times, to hang about all evening like the mists upon Glen Aray. At the
lobby-end—far-off, for the house was long and the passage stretched
from wing to wing of it—a voice was booming from Drimdorran's closet
room; Drimdorran never boomed with greater satisfaction to himself than
after waking from the noisy doze which always followed on his dinner.
Some one was in his room with him—not Margaret, his daughter, nor his
ward, young Campbell, Æneas's other pupil; at times a grown man's voice
broke in on a different key on the laird's delivery; he had an outside
visitor.

Except for this familiar sound from old Drimdorran's business quarters,
that night the passage might have been a gully of the wood abandoned to
the dark, and vegetable odours; the quiet that held the dwelling was the
quiet of suspense and expectation even though Drimdorran boomed.

“They have gone out; I wonder where they are?" thought Æneas, and walked
along the passage. It had upon its flags a runner carpet—yet another of
Drimdorran's Sassenach concessions,—and his footsteps made no sound. At
the top of the service stair which led from the under-world of
stanchioned windows where Drimdorran's celery soup was cooked, a man
stepped out with a lighted candle and drew back, alarmed, when he ran
against the tutor.

“King of the Elements, Master Æneas, but I got there the start!" he
gasped. “You have chased the breath of me into my breast! This is a
house that frightens me—so full of things in waiting. Shadows! Sounds!
My loss that I ever left the Islands! In the name of the Good Being now,
what did you on your face? I did not know one bit of you, and you before
with such a noble whisker!"

“Coma leat sin!—Never mind that, just man!" said Æneas, also in the
Gaelic. “What am I but looking for two rangers? Didst thou by chance see
any sight of my scholars and they a-wandering?"

The Muileach, as they called him from the isle of Mull he came from, was
Drimdorran's man, and had learned in that employ to be discreet in
seeing anything. He shook his head, a hand about the candle for the
draughts, and said: “I have put no eye on them since dinner, Master
Æneas"—but there he stopped, being friendly with the tutor, threw a
glance across his shoulder to be sure they were alone, gave a pull at
his nose and whispered in the loof of his hand, “It might be them, when
I think of it, I saw at the mouth of evening down beside the river."

Some dash of the conspirator, a twinkle in his eye, annoyed the tutor.
“So?" said he shortly; “I'll take a turn that road and maybe come on
them," and he walked out at the porch into the darkness.

It was little more than a step to the clean, cool night from the
celery-scented lobby of Drimdorran House, but every step in life has its
own particular fate attending it, and Æneas Macmaster, though he could
not guess it, gave a twist to his seeming destiny on the moment he had
crossed the threshold.

He was fairly launched upon the great adventure of his life.

*        *        *        *        *

Drimdorran House, with two or three hundred years of weather in its
bones, stood on the slope that rose to the north above the river.
Immediately about it lay its garden, sheltered from the east by clumps
of high-grown firs and a belt of holly round them. From the windows of
the house its owner, at a glance, could see his whole estate—not great,
but snug and compact, tucked in a warm fold of the valley, in the very
bosom of MacCailein's land, with finest grazing of the parish stretched
for half a mile along the river bank, and on the other side two
profitable farms. Upon that green expanse of arable and pasture land a
single tree had never been encouraged, save a scrog of beech and alder
Duncanson the laird had put as a kind of screen between his outlook and
the dovecote tower, which stood, three stories high, more like a place
of ancient strength than a pigeon-house, upon the river's brim. As yet
the planting was too young to hide the tower in any sense, except, as it
might seem, from its former tenants. Never a bird was harboured now in
the dovecote, where, in the time of Paul Macmaster, Æneas's father, they
had swarmed. No one rued their absence less than the laird himself, who
had made great ado with them and helped to breed some droll fantastic
kinds of them with ruffs and pouter bosoms when Paul was still the
laird, and he was Paul's commissioner. Many an hour they spent there in
the dovecote loft; the little lower-story window would be lit till
midnight sometimes, when these two were waiting for a pigeon-post; on
the leg of a homer-pigeon came to Duncanson the news of Sheriffmuir. The
fancy for them must have been most strong in Paul Macmaster; for, when
he was dead, and Duncanson became the laird, he counted what it cost in
grain upon the stalk to feed them, and could never thole the cooing of a
dove again. So he locked the dovecote up, and set the beech and alder
round it, yet even in its abandonment its presence someway marked the
glen more palpably than did the mansion-house.

So much for the place by daylight, but this was a September night when
Æneas Macmaster stepped out on the lawn of what should have been the
house of his inheritance, from the sound of the usurper's booming and
the smell of his celery soup, and early though the night was yet, it was
as black as a porridge-pot. There had been rain all day, so that the
Aray roared at the cataracts below Carlunan Mill, but now the night was
dry; a wind, most melancholy, burdened, to his bookish fancy, with the
griefs of time and change, mourned in the fir plantation; to the east,
beyond MacCailein's castle policies, he could hear the sea billow
thundering.

No light was in the glen except from the house he quitted, where some
windows, looked back on from a little distance when he reached the
garden foot, appeared as yellow squares stuck high up on the arch of
night. One of them he knew to be the window of Drimdorran's closet; none
of them was Margaret's. He felt that the best thing he could do would be
to walk into the town and wait for an explanation of the truancy until
the morrow's morning, but at two-and-twenty years of age it is always
something else than the best in policy that commands our acts, and
Æneas, with one hand feeling at his chin and the other at times thrust
out before him till he had come to his second eyes, passed through the
fringe of shrubbery about the garden limits, and out across the fields
to the river-side. By the time he reached it he had got a little of the
howlet's vision, and the dovecote and its scraggy thicket were to be
perceived as bodies massive, blacker than the night.

It was with something like dismay he saw, for the first time in his
life, a light in the little window on the ground-floor of the tower!

There was nothing, based on thinking, beyond the Muileach's crafty hint,
to make Æneas ascribe the disappearance of his pupils and the lighted
window to one common chain of circumstances, but that notion instantly
took full command of all his movements. For the first time, since he
quitted his uncle's house in the town an hour ago, he lost the
uncomfortable sense of nakedness, and felt more like the man he was
before he shaved. This recovery exhibited itself in a feeling of moral
indignation that he should waste his time on a ninny like young Campbell
and a girl with so little self-respect as to skip the march through Gaul
with Cæsar for the sake of a clandestine hour in an abandoned
pigeon-house.

At first his inclination was to leave the scraggy grove that drew the
night wind through its rustling tops with the swishing sound of a tide
on sand, and made a pattering among the alder leaves, but the chance of
discounting Margaret's anticipated bantering on his changed
appearance—once again remembered with a twinge—by breaking with
tutorial dignity upon her hiding, was too precious to be resisted. On an
impulse that a moment of reflection would have quelled, he strode across
the river gravel laid a score of years ago so thick on the path that led
to the dovecote that even yet the grass had not won through it, and he
hammered loudly on the door.

There was no answer from within, nor the slightest sound of movement.

A wild-bird with a doleful whistle rose a little way off by the
water-side, and swept across the valley towards Drimdorran House, whose
windows seemed more unbelievably aloft in space than ever. All the other
watery windy voices of the night were blent for the moment in a deep
sonorous hum, as if Glen Aray had become a bagpipe drone to which this
searcher in the darkness had his ear; a gust of rising wind was blowing
from Dunchuach.

Æneas stood back a pace, and, lifting up his head, peered at the tower,
whose rounded form stretched high above him like a lighthouse. A just
conception of its size had never been conveyed to him before; it was the
first time he had stood close up beside its white-harled walls, and in
the gloom they looked immense, mysterious, invested with some immaterial
essence as of ancient secrecy and dead men's frustrate plans. It had
been immemorially old when his own folk owned Drimdorran, yet it showed
no symptom of decay, or Duncanson, no doubt, had long since made an end
of it with a blast of powder, for its useless presence roused his
visitors to curiosity and speculation.

A second time he rapped in vain, then groped to find the sneck. His
thumb fell on it as by custom, and he pushed the door, to find, with
some astonishment, the place all dark within. All dark and tenantless!
He could not doubt that he had seen a light a minute or two ago, from
the little window, and he assumed that whosoever used it had ascended to
the upper flights, but the thought immediately gave way before the sure
conviction that in the circle of the chamber he was now encroached on
there was apprehension cowering, and a lantern or a candle in its hand.

Distinctly he could smell the greasy odour of a tallow wick!

It was ever Æneas Macmaster's singular conviction that he was a hopeless
coward, since a property inherent in his blood gave startling meanings
to events which, when approached with trepidation, were disclosed as
trivialities that should not fright a child; and it seemed to him, as he
stood on the flags of the dovecote floor, that it was time to be taking
his feet with him (in the Gaelic phrase of it), and putting the door
between him and this mystery.

Nevertheless he bided, fumbled through his short-tailed coat, and got a
tinder-box wherefrom he struck a light that wanly glowed on the pallid
face of Margaret Duncanson. She stood in agitation by a seed-bin, with
an open lantern in one hand and the key of the dovecote in the other.

“I guessed it would be you," said Æneas quietly, taking the lantern from
her hand and lighting it anew. “You have six-and-thirty ways of being
foolish, and every one of them's more idiotic than the other: what puts
you on an escapade like this, and I to be waiting for you yonder with
the Commentarii?"

She was a littlish woman, black-avised, a year or two perhaps his
junior, with eyes like sloes, not strictly speaking by the letter
beautiful, but beautiful enough to be going on with, as Roderick said
about his first shape at a fishing-skiff. Her head was bare, as if she
had just run over from the house.

“Oh!" she gasped, with a hand on her heaving chest, “you have given me
two horrible experiences! I thought at first you were my father, and
then when you struck the light I thought you were a stranger! I went
almost into a swound; if I live to a hundred years I'll never be nearer
one. How did you think of coming here?"

Æneas pointed to the window sunk in a five-feet depth of wall; she saw
at once how it had betrayed her, looked about her hurriedly, picked up
some empty sacks and stuffed them in the opening.

“What a fool I was not to think of that!" said she with agitation.
“Nothing would have quicker brought my father down upon me!"

“And what, if I may ask, are you doing here?" said Æneas.

“Looking about me, only," she replied, recovering a pertness that was
obviously her nature. “I was determined to see the inside of the doocot.
Here have I been staring at it every day since my infancy, and this is
the first occasion I have put a foot inside the door."

“It's surely a fancy that could be gratified at a more convenient
season," said the tutor gravely, “and with less of the clandestine
element. Any day, I'm sure your father would have given you the key."

She made a grimace which brought an unbroken coal-black line across her
face by the joining of her eyebrows. “I had to find it for myself," she
answered. “He had mislaid it. In any case, he said he was not going to
have me break my neck on these rotten steps. And now that I am here, I
find it was hardly worth my trouble; there's nothing wonderful to see,
and in the last half-hour I have ransacked the place from top to
bottom."

Æneas cast an inquiring glance at the wooden steps which led to the
hatch above them.

“They're not so bad," said she.

“You would get the wind about you, anyway," said Æneas. “It must be cold
up there, blowing through a hundred pigeon-holes."

“Not it! As snug as a cellar; every pigeon-hole in the tower is boarded
up inside."

With the lantern dangling from a finger, he surveyed the kind of cell to
which Miss Margaret's escapade had led him. It must have been the
storeroom of the dovecote in its active period; the great corn-bin
filled up a part of it; there was a pile of sacks half-filled with
mildewed grain, and others wholly empty; creels, spades, and other tools
were flung about; the lantern, too, he found was to be included in the
plenishing—Margaret had found it hanging on a staple. Upon the chamber
and its properties the dust of years was thickly settled; to stir in the
trash of the floor was to raise a cloud that floated like a smoke in the
lantern's beams. He felt begrimed, uncomfortable; some repugnance of the
place came over him; he wanted to be gone.

Most of all he thought of the place as an inappropriate setting for the
personality of Margaret Duncanson, whose airy summer gown demanded
something finer in the way of background; whose sprightliness ill
accorded with the sombre air of this forsaken vault, that somehow made
her less attractive than she was for usual. He had lost the
consciousness of the change on his appearance, and was only brought back
to an uneasy apprehension of her mockery by the interest with which she
stared at him, now that her fears were past. There was a glint of
mischief in her eyes, but she cunningly said not a word on the topic he
had expected her to make much of; that was Margaret's most disconcerting
power to mortify—she always chose some different way from what he had
expected.

“That's a night lost!" he said at last. “You're accounted for, but where
is William?"

She flushed, and laughed uneasily. “And is he truant too?" she asked.
“Never mind! I have something here of interest to show you; I found it
with the doocot key,—isn't that the ravishing creature?"

It was a little silver snuffbox, which she opened with the pressure of a
finger so that he could see inside the lid of it the miniature of a
girl. Indeed the portrait justified Margaret's admiration; it pleased
the casual glance immediately, and opened up some curious charms to the
more intent examination. Holding it up to the lantern lozen, Æneas
devoured its every feature—the little tilted chin, the lips a bit apart
in what might either be a smile or an inward breath of something on the
verge of tears, the forehead swept by waves of auburn hair that had in
parts the copper hue of winter breckans, the throat that seemed even in
the paint to have the animation of a voice that would be sweet, the
gradual white shoulders just escaping from the shelter of a crimson
cloak. What hit most strongly at the sentiment of Æneas was a kind of
pause in the expression; in some moment of suspended eagerness the woman
had been taken, and something of rebellion cried from her parted lips
and in her lifted eyes.

“My goodness!" he cried out, “it is a jewel! The heart of me is half
divided between the fellow who could paint it and the darling who could
give him such a chance. It's Holbein, honest man! with something of the
mountain breeze in him, and it puts me out of taste with all yon round
fat faces that they have in Amsterdam! Where on earth did you get it?"

“Do you think she is beautiful?" Margaret said, paying no attention to
his question.

“Beautiful," said he, “is but a word; I could not rightly tell you what
she is unless I played the fiddle."

“What raptures! And I'll swear she's dead a hundred years!"

“No, nor fifty, by the execution," said the tutor. . . . “What is that?"

He straightened up with a jerk, as if he had been stabbed between the
shoulders. He turned his head to the side a little. He listened with
suspended breath. Not the most trivial sound was to be heard within the
tower in which the stillness of the grave was reigning, nor anything
outside beyond the dry clash of the beech-tops, whelmed in the hum that
came at intervals from every twig and leaf together when a fresh gust
struck the planting.

“I could swear I heard the scuffle of a step," he whispered. “Did you?"

Margaret shook her head. She was as grey as sleet, and terror was in her
eyes. The tip of her tongue played nervously between her lips.

“You should not have been here! You should never have come here!" she
gasped in an under-breath. “I hate the very look of you! If my father
finds us here he'll kill me! O Lord! haven't I been the silly woman!"

“Listen, Margaret; listen!" he enjoined her, slipping the snuffbox into
his pocket and clutching her arm. “I'm certain I heard someone outside!"

She began to weep in a singular way that puckered up her face and sent
the tear-drops down her cheeks and all without a sound, like a woman
dumb.

“There! There it is again! There's someone walking round the doocot,"
said Æneas.

There was no mistake about it; plainly they could hear the footsteps on
the gravel, appallingly deliberate and stealthy.

“It's you! It's you!" she charged him, gulping sobs. “You came here like
a fool, and somebody's following you."

“Nonsense!" he whispered. “Nobody, I'm sure, saw me—the night's like
pitch;" and he was shaken not a little at the pickle in which his being
there involved her. “I'll tell you who it is," he hurried on with a
comforting inspiration, “it's Will."

She moaned. “Whoever it is," she said, “it's certainly not Will; he
couldn't possibly be here. I know in every vein of me it's father, and
oh! how on earth could he discover?"

“The light in the window," whispered Æneas.

“Aren't we the fools!" she exclaimed. “He'll be in this moment! Blow out
the candle!"

It went out at a puff from Æneas just as a hand began to fumble with the
iron door-latch.

The door itself came slowly inward; they could hear the hinges creak,
and the cold wind fanned them. The darkness of the chamber and the dark
outside were one in hue, and whoever stood in the doorway was invisible,
but they heard the breathing and it was a man's. He never said a word,
but stood for half a minute on the threshold, once only uttering a sigh.
It was, of all the strange experience, the most dauntening of things,
that sigh, which seemed to gush up from the depth of misery. Margaret's
fingers sunk into the flesh of her companion's arm till he winced with
the pain of it. He could hear the beating of her heart—or could it be
his own, so stormy?

A moment later and she would have screamed, but the figure in the
doorway turned; the hinges squealed again; the iron latch fell into its
catch with a clatter, and the footsteps crunched across the gravel, this
time less deliberate. Then the wind resumed its prevalence.

Still greatly dashed, the tutor took to flint and steel again and lit
the lantern when it seemed the visitor had no intention of returning,
and found a great relief imprinted upon Margaret's countenance.

“Thank God he didn't speak!" said she. “That would have finished me."

“Strange!" said Æneas musingly, like one apart; “I would have better
liked to have a voice to him."

“No! no!" she said, “not I! I dreaded it! Do you think he suspected any
one was here?"

“He knew it perfectly!" said Æneas ruefully,—“if he had a nose upon the
face of him. What way did I not think of pinching out the candle! This
one fairly stinks."

They stood for twenty minutes more imprisoned in their cell,
deliberating on a score of possibilities about that baffling visitation.
No vagrant reputation of the neighbourhood was overlooked—the chance of
gangrels, thieves, or spies,—but always they came back upon that
disconcerting sigh which gave some tone to the experience not in key
with any theory they could advance. One thing Margaret was blissfully
convinced of—that it had not been her father. “Had it been he," said
she, “and knew that any one was here, nothing under heaven would have
turned him back!"

Æneas at last went out, leaving her the lantern, muffled till the door
was closed behind him. He circled round the tower; traversed the path a
little, questioned the night with every sense, and then returned to tell
her that the way was clear. They could not flee the place too
quickly!—When the door was locked behind them, over her head she drew
her cloak and ran across the grass like one demented. Before he could
decide what next to do the dark had swallowed her.

“Fair wind to her!" said he; and turned about, and started for his
lodging. He had not gone a hundred yards when a reflection stopped
him—he had still the snuffbox! Five minutes later he was in her
father's house again, to find her speaking with the Muileach in the
lobby at whose end Drimdorran still was booming.

Without a word for him she snatched the snuffbox from his hand and
dashed upstairs.




CHAPTER II.

AT THE OUTPOST.


A mile of distance from Drimdorran House and from the glen, from whose
tail-end it was shut off by old high woods, there was, at the time, what
might be properly regarded as the strongest outpost of invasive
influences which by sap and contravallation were, in God's good
providence, to destroy the ancient Highland world. Already it was shaken
to its mountain roots, save in the farther North. Whole tribes, that not
so long ago were ill to meddle with as any bike of wasps, were now as
little to be feared as butterflies; packmen from the Lowlands sometimes
travelled through the worst-reputed valleys selling specs, and ribbons.
Here and there in the Garbh-chrioch—the Rugged Bounds,—and even as
near at hand as on the fringes of Breadalbane, there was still an orra
chief with a ferocious gang about him, struggling—unsubdued, defiant,
doomed—against some force that was more hateful and alarming since so
often it assumed the insubstantial shape of alien ideas, not of arms:
they roved, these fellows, still, in an always lessening area, demanding
for themselves a savage liberty, holding the sword as the only tool and
charter fit for the duineuasail, the Gaelic gentleman, and they ever
grew more desperate as they felt the squeeze of this encroaching
civilisation. Beyond the confines of their native glens they knew
themselves for outlaws. Their people followed them from custom, born
with the conviction that the clan must stick together and go out upon
the old road when Himself required: Himself, with a handful of savage
virtues, made the clan the instrument of his every selfish inspiration,
spoon-fed them with the flattery of blood equality, and in return
extorted blind submission to his whims.

Perhaps at the spring of things no loftier motives influenced the
invasion, but the assault at least was carried on with a superficial
elegance, and nowhere with a more unflagging zeal than from the outpost
of Argyll, settled, itself, for more than a hundred years, its capital
become a Lowland town in all except the language, with a philabeg or
weapon scarcely to be seen upon its causeway, save on a fair or market
day. Here was the destiny of the clans decided; crafty policies inimical
to lawless folk and broker men were hatched; the Duke, MacCailein
Mór,—Red John of Battles, as they called him,—held the fate of
Gaeldom in the hollow of his hands. He had never seen the Uist
machar-lands, so fine, so sorrowful, nor even but afar the great brave
peaks of Skye, but he had widely seen the world, and no one living
better knew the Gaelic people. Nor more was he familiar in the flesh to
the scattered folks who spoke of him in fashions roundabout—as of a man
inscrutable, invisible, and to be feared, directly named as cautiously
as possible, much better indicated as the “Red One," with a fidget of
the shoulder.

Even Inveraray saw but little of him; from the age of seventeen, when he
was colonel, he had fought in all the wars and sieges; more than once he
was the Regent in his sovereign's absence; half his days were spent in
London. And yet it was upon his flying visits to Loch Fyne that, with
his brother Islay, he concerted every plan to tame the clans above the
Grampians. The strings of Hanoverian policy for Gaeldom ended there, in
him, and yet in manner he was simple as a child. For him and Islay (who
was most at home, though also something of a wanderer), messengers and
spies continually were plying through the troubled shires, in which,
likewise, he filled a thousand offices with his nominees.

In island crofts and mainland clachans that knew him not but as a
fabulous being, the castle of MacCailein Mór, in which they somehow
learned their destinies were handled and arranged, was pictured in the
people's fireside winter ceilidhs as enormous, filled with regiments
of Campbells; no other way, they thought, could he maintain the power
which even their chiefs confessed. They figured him as misty and
Fingalian, night and day in an iron coat, and brooding, without sleep,
upon their harrying.

And the droll thing was, if they had only known it, that though he loved
and mastered Gaeldom, it engaged his mind but casually when he was in
its bounds; he spent himself more lavishly on greater things. Though the
strings might come together in his castle, some one else was usually at
their pulling—his brother Islay, Keeper of the Privy Seal, who, in his
absence, left them to a man whose name was never heard outside the
confines of his parish—Alexander Duncanson, Black Sandy.

Great men may plot and rule, but always there is some one inconspicuous
who executes; for nine months of the year—in unvexed periods at all
events—Black Sandy was as good as Duke, and ruled the Highlands, in so
far as they were capable of rule, from the closet in Drimdorran House.
He was, officially, MacCailein's Baron-Bailie, also Islay's business man
or “doer," ward of his lordship's natural son, and private secretary;
but all his neighbours knew this did not limit his authority. Had but
the clansmen only guessed what common being ruled their destinies,
instead of that fantastic monster they imagined; had they any proper
notion of MacCailein's castle, dark through half the winter, undefended,
they would certainly have swarmed across the passes!

The castle was a keep of insignificant extent, and jostled on the shore
side by the town, the smoke of which in certain winds blew in upon
MacCailein's very dinner-table. It was a burgh of no great proportions,
vilely overcrowded, far too often with the tar-pot burning for its
fevers, only half the houses slated, these the winter domiciles of
landed gentry having dwellings elsewhere, or of thriving merchants. No
rational plan was in the town's arrangement; it lay all heads and thraws
in a nook at an angle of the river and the loch, with crooked, narrow,
broken lanes with all the gable-ends of the abutting buildings
frontaging the thoroughfare, cold-shouldering the passers-by. In the
hour of the meridian dram it did a thriving business in a score of inns
or taverns; it was the briskest period of the day for this metropolis
which did the best part of its work in furtive ways in writers'
chambers, since, now that steel was going out of fashion, people did
their quarrelling before the Sheriff or the Lords. Near the quay,
however, there were profitable booths and market-stances; the shipping
trade was always growing.

Æneas's uncle—Alan-Iain-Alain Og, as he was styled before they made him
Bailie—had a store beside the quay, below his dwelling-house; although
he never lowered himself to put his belly to a counter or put on a
brattie, he maintained a prosperous merchant business, due in no small
measure to the influence of MacCailein. Three ships he had that traded
with the islands and the North, and even to the coast of France and up
the Baltic; in busy seasons he kept half a dozen coopers going. From
Ayrshire he bought oatmeal cargoes that were sent about the Mull to the
Shire of Inverness and to the Hebrides, along with herring, salt, and
timber, but the bulk of the merchandise he brought from London, Dantzic,
Rotterdam, Stockholm, Cadiz, or the Mediterranean was stored and
packeted at Inveraray in the sheds which smelt of lemons, spices, smoked
salmon, or Archangel tar, according to the season.

“That's right!" the Duke would say to him, with a jaunty step into the
store among the coopers packing powdered sugar, tea, and hops, silk
cloths, tobacco-rolls, and looking-glasses,—“that's right, Bailie! keep
tickling them with luxuries, and I'll guarantee you'll help to subjugate
my savage Hielandmen far quicker than we'll do it with their Watches and
dragoons."

Such was MacCailein's humour—that the spirit of the mountains could be
pacified if once the people got a taste for something more than brose
and tartan; he looked upon the Bailie as a pioneer, and gave him every
help to send his merchandise in safety, even to Clan Campbell's
bitterest enemies. The Duke secured for him a share of the commissariat
of the garrisons at Fort William, Bernera in Glenelg, and Duart, Mull;
on two or three occasions he had got for him a convoy of the troops to
run a thousand bolls of meal by horse through troubled country to
Kilchuimin Fort, fed usually from Inverness.

And the Bailie, too, had a kind of vanity in his part in Highland
politics; he would give a chuckle when he got the bills of chiefs like
Keppoch or Glengarry, all payable at Crieff, and, waving them like
trophies, would say to his spouse, who was a lowland woman, “Annabel,
a' ghalaid, here's another hem on Donald's shroud! I'm getting all the
papists in the North for customers!"

“Perhaps they'll not can pay ye when it comes to Michaelmas!" would she
say anxiously, for Annabel was never sure of any Hielandman except her
own.

And there would her husband laugh at her: on Gaelic probity—for all the
cattle-lifting—no small part of his business had been founded, and he
knew his money would be sure at Crieff, even if the man who owed it had
to seek the tryst with a hundred claymores round him.

He was a sturdy-built, broad-shouldered chunk of a man who had at one
time been the champion hammer-thrower of the shire and a great hand with
the gun, but that was five-and-twenty years ago. Mercantile prosperity
would seem to have an ill effect upon the trunk, in which the energy and
elegance of men and women mainly centre, as they say, and he was grown a
little heavy and deliberate in his movements. Never again the white hare
on the hill for Alan-Iain-Alain Og! Never again the mountain-tops!
Himself, he was a notable example of the Highlandman as altered by the
progress of the times—no spark of the adventurer nor any natural
wildness left in him, as one might think to see him in the kirk; devoted
to his wife and bairnless fireside, going no farther off from them than
once a year to Crieff or Glasgow, all his business in the North and in
the Islands being done for him by agents or his skippers. Indeed it took
him all his time to handle things at Inveraray, where he was for ever on
the quay at which a boat of his was certain to be warped, or in the
store where he broke his bulk and made up packages.

He had been busy all that day at the unloading of a freight of cod and
kipper salmon sent through his agent, Zachary Macaulay, in the Lews, by
his Good Intent, a vessel of 50 tons; the work of the day was over,
and he was wearily going up the outside stair to his house above the
store when Æneas, with a lighter step, came up behind him.

“You're surely early home!" said the uncle as they were passing into the
house together.

“There was no evening lesson," answered Æneas. “The young fellow was
amissing and Miss Margaret——" He was on the point of saying something
that he realised might lead to questioning and involve exposure of the
lady's escapade, and that, he felt, would not be fair to her, so he
checked himself in the middle of his sentence.

Bailie Macmaster noticed the check in his nephew's speech, and slyly
glanced at him as he shut the outer door. Annabel had put a cruisie in
the porch. No little part of Alan-Iain-Alain Og's prosperity was due to
the fact that he could put two and two together and not make five of
them; he caught his nephew by the shoulder before they left the porch to
go in where sat the mistress, and he said in Gaelic, which is capable of
searching personal examination framed in words of no offence, “Angus,
lad, art in any way concerned with yon young woman?"

“What should make you think it?" Æneas asked him.

“The thing, my shorn young lad, that made the roebuck sniff and not a
hunter to be seen—a bit of a smell to windward! I never knew a man of
two-over-twenty start at shaving if there was not something in the
thicket. Let thou make a fool of thyself with old Drimdorran's lass and
the tune is through the fiddle! He will crush ye like a biscuit."

“I'm as good a man as he!" said Æneas, not greatly put about.

“Indeed and ye are, and better! Sandy has not got the blood; our kin
were in Drimdorran when his ancestors were feeding pigs in Coll. But
that is not the bit of it! Let him get it into yon brindled head of his
that ye're like to mar his plan for getting Islay's son for his daughter
Margaret and ye'll find it not a healthy climate here in Inveraray."

“To the dev——"

“At thy leisure, lad!" said the Bailie, back to his English, warningly,
for his nephew's tone was getting high. “Not a word of this to herself
in-by; I kent before ye mentioned it that the schooling had been off
this evening; Will Campbell was on the quay and told me; that's the
reason for the roebuck sniffing." He chuckled slyly, pinching his
nephew's arm. “Keep a dog's bark distance from Drimdorran's kennel, when
business does not bring ye there!" and they went in together to the room
where Annabel was spinning, with a supper ready on the board.

The room, lit by a girandole, had an iron grate, a glass above the
chimney-brace, a wainscot table, rosewood chairs with water-tabby
bottoms, and a floorcloth made of tapestry, all plenishing that marked
it as the room of a thriving gentleman, for the Bailie liked to see
things tosh and cosy round about him, and brought many a bit of
plenishing from London in his barques: still Annabel would aye be at the
spinning in the midst of all that grandeur, with the rollagan—the
carded wool—in a creel beside her feet. On the top of a large
'scritoire were the books of Æneas that he had brought from Utrecht with
him; they were his aunt's delight to look at, though she could not read
a word of them, as they were mainly in the Latin.

Annabel was a clever body,—geur, as her husband called her, which is
sharp, and sly, and gently mocking in an Ayrshire country fashion, and
implies the tartish quality which judges like in sappy Ayrshire apples.
A good deal younger than her man, it was her humour to maintain a sort
of playful coquetry with Æneas, as she said herself, to keep her hand in
at the gallivanting. The same good madame had not altogether lost the
art of it; she still could fleech and tease the laddie like a young one!
Perhaps the game was not judicious, for it had one consequence she never
bargained for—it made her nephew clever far too cheaply and too soon at
a sport that properly should have a stiff apprenticeship, and not with
aunties.

Her husband, he would laugh at her betraying all the tricks that won
himself in a fortnight's courtship down at Girvan, but sometimes he
would ask her if the thing was altogether wise; there was a risk that
Æneas might find this sham philandering grow stale, and all the sooner
try his hand on game with uncut feathers.

“No fear o' that!" said Annabel on these occasions; “the mair he kens o'
his auntie's wiles the better he's set up to come unscathed through
others; it's what I would do wi' a son o' my ain if I wasna a'thegither
doited. Laitin doesna learn ye how to meet designin' women."

“Ubh! Ubh! that's an awful character ye're giving to your sex, mem."

“Man! Alan, do ye think the Lord intended men to hae the whole o' the
manœuverin'?" would Annabel say, with pity smiling on him. “But ye canna
say I ran after you!" she added quickly, to preserve a married woman's
last illusion.

“Oh no!" says he, “I'll no' say that of ye; ye just went on ahead and
dragged a hook. But I'm no' complaining, whatever."

“And a bonny fish I caught!—a ragin' Hielandman!" quo' Annabel.

“All the same, a' ghalaid! it is time ye had your draglines in. It's
my belief ye're keepin' up the practice wi' some end in view, and
lookin' at your carry-on wi' Æneas I feel I would be hooked again mysel'
if ye happened to be my widow."

And there she would laugh at that, fair like to end herself, and tell
him to put it in the Gaelic for himself and see what sense it made.

That night when Æneas and her man came in where her wheel was purring
she was in a merry key. By, on the instant, went the wheel and
rollagan. Never before, since Æneas had been a lodger, had he managed
to get back from his evening task in time to join them at their supper;
she was so pleased with this unusual experience that she never asked its
reason.

Down on a stool plumped Æneas and took off his spatter-dashes. “Never
mind the leggin's i' the now," said she impatiently. “Sit in, my dear,
and take your supper; I'm sure ye're needin' it. . . . Unless your
appetite is gone," she added, twinkling, “wi' broodin' on your trouble."

“The only trouble I have," said Æneas, “is a right sore head,"—the
fusty dovecote air had made him really ache a little.

“Oh, that!" said Annabel. “Distemper! I ettled there was something wrong
when I saw ye shaved this mornin'. For puppy ailments there's naething
beats the auld cure—butter and brunstane. I thought it might be
something mair alarmin'. Alan, sit ye in, and pass the bannocks."

The Bailie did as he was told, then loosened several buttons. Something
in her manner told him that she was at her old pranks in a quickened
spirit, and still he was bound to laugh within himself at her
play-acting with the youth—the way she bobbed her ringlets, and
languished on him with her eyes, and hung on his most trivial utterance.
Annabel Loudoun, in her Girvan days, for a lass bred in a manse, was
wonderfully acquainted with the worldly arts; in twenty years of married
life she had forgotten none of them, and she was helped in them by
having still a jimp and girlish figure and a dauntless grip of youth.

“Thoire an aire!—Watch thyself! she's up to mischief!" Alan warned
his nephew in the Gaelic, which they seldom spoke before her for good
manners' sake.

“There ye are!" she cried with an affected anger. “Tak' to your savage
language when ye're plottin', baith o' ye, for my deceivin'."

“Ye should have learned it then, and been upsides with us," rallied her
man.

“I had mair to do," was her retort, “and I didna do sae badly wi' ye wi'
my lalland Scots. A bonny pair ye are—the jeely man, for
Æneas!—keepin' me in the dark about the cairry-ons wi' silly glaikit
lassies!"

This hit so close on Æneas's last experience that he started, whereupon
she laughed with mock bitterness, and made a great pretence at wounded
vanity.

“Oh!" she cried, throwing up her hands in comical resignation, “I ken
fine I'm gettin' auld: it wasna to be expected I could keep my joe. Ye
needna glower, Alan, sittin' there like a craw in the mist! I'll have it
out wi' the young rapscallion."

“Tuts! there's no' the lady in the parish I would even wi' ye, auntie,"
said the nephew. “I doubt there's no' another, neither, who could bake
as good a scone," and he helped himself to one of those proofs of her
housewifery.

“I didna say she was a lady, did I? Just a hoyden lass 'that's bidin'
wi' her daddie O!' as the sang says. She daesna ken the schemin' rascal
that she's ta'en the fancy for. My scones, quo' he! I might have kent it
was the press and what was in it kept ye in the house at night; it wasna
Annabel Loudoun's charms, fair fa' them! I clean forgot ye were just a
laddie till I saw ye shaved."

That touched Æneas on the tender side of his assurance; the youth, which
for her was something not to be relinquished without a gallant struggle,
was for him a mortifying burden, and he reddened at her confirmation of
a feeling that had lately grown upon himself. She was quick to see where
she had pricked him, and at once her manner changed; there is a point
where friskiness in mellow ladies becomes grotesque and pitiful, but
Annabel was far too shrewd to push her humour such a length. She changed
her key immediately.

“There now!" said she, “amn't I the haiverin' body! Just put it down to
a done auld auntie's jealousy! But I'll say this for the lass—she might
be waur; indeed she's just the kind I would pick for mysel' if I had
breeks."

“What's this lass ye're bletherin' about?" her husband asked, surprised
that so soon she should, like himself, have got upon the scent of
Margaret.

“A figment of the mind," said Æneas, smiling, though uneasy; the
dovecote business was assuming more significance than ever.

“That's what a young man's view of any woman is if he's fond enough,"
said Annabel. “But I'm no' gaun to say another word about your
infidelity; that would be cruel to yoursel' and hardly fair to the lass
whose secret I discovered this afternoon. Your name, I can assure ye,
was never mentioned, at least she never mentioned it, but every time I
did, I saw her give a hotch upon her chair."

“I wish I knew who it was!" said Æneas with resignation.

“Mercy on us, Lothario! Bluebeard!" cried Annabel. “There are so many o'
them about him that when I charge him wi' his perfidy he canna guess the
particular one I mean! Was ever such a monster! Let me tell ye this,
Æneas, this one's secret is safe wi' your auntie Annabel; I'll put her
at no disadvantage next time that ye meet her."

“I told ye, Æneas," said his uncle gravely, “that the roebuck had his
head up, though I didna think the hind had got the scent o' anything."

“There was never less excuse for sniffing, then," said Æneas dryly. “I
never changed ten words outside her father's door with that one since I
started teaching in Drimdorran—well, until to-night. And that's the
last I hope to hear of her in this connection, flattering though you may
consider it to mix her name with mine, Aunt Annabel. If you want to
know—the lady's much too interested in Willie Campbell to bother her
head about me."

Annabel stared at him, astonished. “Nonsense!" she exclaimed. “I think I
have my wits about me, and she sat this very afternoon on that chair
you're on, fidgetin' at every step in the lane——"

“What, Margaret!" says he, and at that his aunt gave a gasp and began to
laugh. “Ye perfect villain!" she cried, “is Maggie Duncanson a victim
too? 'Faith it wouldna be a bad way for ye to get back your father's
property—to marry Maggie; but na, na, I couldna thole Drimdorran in the
family;" and not a word more, good or bad, would she say about the
topic, though her husband, now curious himself, made sly attempts at
drawing her.

“Who were ye talkin' of?" he asked, when Æneas had gone out a little
later, leaving them to their evening game of dambrod.

She bustled at the clearing of the table. “I'm no' gaun to tell ye
that!" said she. “If women are to have a chance at a', they must be
loyal to each other."

“I thought at first like Æneas," said he, “that ye were on the track o'
Margaret."

Annabel slyly smiled. “I think," said she, “I have spoiled her chance
wi' him, if ever she had any; there's no' a quirk in Margaret's wee
black heid I havena put him up to wi' my actin' o' the lovesick lass. To
tell the truth to ye, that was the object o' my philanderin' wi' him.
When he came back from Holland he was just a greenhorn; he couldna look
at a short-gown dryin' on a line but aff his hat went to it, and his
face went red. Any rubbish a woman liked to utter to him he would listen
to wi' reverence. I mind o' him wi' Bella Vicar—she had been talkin'
some poetic nonsense to him, wi' yon dark, eerie, Hielan' eyes o' hers
in the proper shape to hint at a soul as deep as a loch behind them, and
when she was gone says he to me, 'There's something fascinatin' in that
girl; I feel I could never quite understand her; wonderfu' depth o'
character!' 'Heaven help me, is it Bella!' says I. 'Ye muckle calf!
she's just as shallow as that ashet! Yon meltin' voice and swimmin' e'e
were a' put on for your beguilement, and she didna understand the half
o' what ye said about your Mr Milton, though she let on she did.' 'A
certain kind o' mystery,'—says he, and at that I fairly lost my
patience wi' him. 'The mystery's all in your imagination,' I tell't him.
'There's no' as much mystery in Bella as would keep ye gaun for a week
wi' her.'"

“She's a fine, big, bouncin' girl, whatever of it," said the Bailie,
putting out the dambrod men.

“Just that! That's all you saw in her, you wicked monster; poor Æneas,
on the ither hand, wi' a heid fu' o' Laitin poetry and nae experience,
saw naething but the mystery. There's a mystery about a pig in a poke,
and it's aye the innocents that's maist ta'en up wi't. I saw my nephew
had a lot to learn afore he could be trusted anywhere awa' frae men and
aunties and the books o' that 'scritoire; I was just in mortal terror
Maggie Duncanson would glamour him between her tasks; he was like a ripe
plum ready to drop into her pinny. That's the way I started makin' a
parade o' tender interest in him. Losh! Alan, do you mind the fright he
got at first when he thocht I maybe was in earnest!"

“I was put about to think it might be Margaret," said the Bailie.
“Everybody kens that her father has an eye on Islay's son for her;
that's the way he clapped her in wi' William for the lessons, though
Æneas was only hired by Islay for the lad."

“Margaret's a very clever lass wi' no' much sense, and she'll be better
suited wi' Will Campbell," said Annabel. “But I doubt my practice wi'
him hasna made him proof against attack in other quarters; a lass was
sittin' in that very chair ye're on, twa hours ago, and she's the very
kind to lead him on a halter made o' snow."




CHAPTER III.

NINIAN MACGREGOR CAMPBELL.


Æneas had left his uncle's house with an intention to go up the glen
again and make a search about the dovecote neighbourhood; it hovered in
his mind that possibly some wastrel band of cairds was harbouring near
Carlunan, and might have among them the intruder on the tower. Yet he
had hardly reached the causeway when there flashed on him the popular
repute of Ninian Campbell, who had, earlier in the day, been asking for
him. That curious man, for whom the darkness of a strath, the sleep of
towns, could hide no secret, might, in a sentence, dissipate the
mystery!

Ninian was a Campbell only for expedience—his father was Macgregor of
Dalvoulin in Balwhidder, who, when the Gregorach were shaken out of all
their ancient holds like weevils from a seaman's biscuit, and their very
name proscribed, had found protection with MacCailein and a home in
Shira Glen. This clemency was not without design; Macgregor of Dalvoulin
paid for his security in wits. He wore the myrtle badge at Sheriffmuir,
but also plied a craftier war, and long-sustained, by night and day, and
disconcerting, with Clan Campbell's enemies, most of whom were now his
own. In the place of his adoption he was known as “Iain Beachdair"—John
the Scout. He throve amazingly, and had a tack of some extent between
Glen Shira and the braes of Cladich. Ninian, when his father died, took
up the beachdair business, but dignified and cloaked a little by the
sounding name of Messenger-at-Arms, though such a thing as a citation
never soiled his hands. He was Macgregor to the bone—a gentleman with
curious toleration for the broken lawless folk whose fortunes as a
laddie he had shared—the scurry in the mist, the night-long watches,
skulkings in the heather; even in his burgess days he could not see a
drove of cattle passing but his eye would lift. Many a time Lord Islay
got him on the hill with the gun below his oxter, only to shake a finger
at him with “Ah, Ninian! ye'll never lose your taste for venison!"
“Indeed," would Ninian say, no more abashed than if he had been stalking
weasels, “here's a man that never yet turned his back to a haunch of
that same nourishment. Good sport, Islay, for the day with both of us!"

Such a man as Ninian was worth his weight in gold as an instrument of
governmental strategy. He knew the Highlands as he knew his pocket;
below Loch Ness, at least, there was no pass or cave or clachan where he
had not as a boy been wet and cold and weary, or sat about a fir-wood
fire, or cried out the triple hoot of the cailleach-oidhche—the
night-hag owl—to warn his folk of something dangerous stirring. As
Messenger-at-Arms, with a badge he never showed, he was for ever on the
road upon MacCailein's business, gathering hints and tracking rumours;
the jealousies and pacts of clans, the private character of chiefs and
chieftains, were better known to him than anybody; his was the skill
that foiled them often in their plans.

It was his habit to be always out at night. “That is the time," he would
say, “for people of my name and occupation. It is in the night that
things worth while will aye be happening in the Highlands. There's
nothing to be learned in daylight except that the girl is beautiful or
otherwise, and people all mean well." The dark for him was full of
meanings, intimations; things dim in daytime, tangled and confused,
assumed a rational order then.

This curious faculty in Ninian it was that, coming to Æneas's
recollection, sent him in a hurry to the house the beachdair occupied
in town from harvest-end till spring. So keen he was to have his
curiosity assuaged that he forgot, to start with, that no matter how he
put the case, there was a danger that Miss Margaret's escapade would be
revealed: when this occurred to him, the purpose of his call on Ninian
seemed scarcely wise. Nevertheless, he followed out his inclination,
which, to tell the truth of it, was influenced in a measure, though he
did not let his mind dwell on it, by the fact that Ninian had a
daughter!

She was in the house alone when he was shown into it by a
servant-lass—a piece of luck, as he first esteemed it, which he had not
looked for, though it soon took on a different complexion. Her father,
earlier in the evening, had been summoned out on business, and she
expected his return at any moment.

Æneas waited willingly; there could not be a better chance to improve an
acquaintance with the lady who, since he had left her at her door three
weeks ago at two o'clock on a moonlight morning, had occupied his mind
much more than he himself was well aware of, and all the more remarkably
since in the interval she had been unusually invisible. There was a
reason why the parting in the moonlight morning should engage his mind
and make him now uneasy as he took the seat she proffered; harmless
practice with a merry aunt had had exactly that result his uncle looked
for,—Æneas some time ago had learned that women were not quite so
terribly austere as he had thought at first and that even a frolic
interchange of gallantries had a good deal more of spice in it when
exercised with others than with Annabel. It was not a quite unpractised
hand who, as the convoy from a ball, for Janet Campbell, boldly sought a
Highland convoy's fee in the shape of a parting salutation in the
moonlight, and got her palm across his cheek!

The tingle of that buffet stayed with him for days; he felt it now as he
sat in her parlour-room, and all his puzzling about the dovecote
incident was swamped in a flood of new sensations.

It was the first time he had seen her in her own surroundings, which
conferred upon her all the charm of novelty. She seemed a different
being from the wide-hooped, tightly-bodiced partner he had sailed with
down Macglashan's room, so simply dressed now, so demure and
purpose-like, as if the house were meant to be her natural setting, that
he took a new disgust at his own effrontery.

Not a word, of course, was said about that lamentable error, but her
face, for usual pale, had a flush that spoke of some commotion, though
she quickly took to her tambouring-girr, and stitching wildly, dashed
into a conversation miles remote from the topic of the unlucky ball. He
felt he was not forgiven, and he cursed anew his folly, seeing, as he
fancied, half alarm and half reproof in her grey eyes, however level and
unflinching, placed upon him.

He did not see her in detail so much as, in a fashion, take her presence
in by other senses—the sound of her voice with its tang of Gaelic
lending softness to her careful English sentences, all trimly finished
even to the “g's" his lowland aunt could not be bothered with; the
little scratchings that her needle made upon her thimble; her breathing,
which, in awkward pauses in their conference, seemed to indicate an
agitation that he felt himself; a perfume, fugitive and pleasant, as of
cool spring wells, that hung about her garments.

This hint of wells, and mornings cool and fragrant, all at once began to
give to her a character which he had never thought before was shared by
human beings with the landscape he delighted in—surprise, variety, and
stimulation; she was like a day upon the wild high moors in spring, and
when she spoke it was the creamy gurgle of the April burns.

He took a look at her again, enchanted, when her eyes were on her
occupation, hardly knowing what he talked of.

“I haven't seen you for so long!" he said with recklessness. “You have
been busy? Do you never come out?"

“Oh yes!" she answered, “every day. I was at your uncle's house this
afternoon."

His face went crimson! The visitor his aunt had spoken of was not
imaginary; Janet was the girl!

He felt abashed, remembering Annabel's interpretation of her caller's
fidgeting, though fidgeting was none of Janet's traits to-night, however
much they were his own. The calm was all with her, with him the gale of
agitation, and now it swelled into a whirlwind blast in which his wits
seemed blown away like perished leaves and swirling in the air. It is,
indeed, a staggering hour when youth with no experience of these
tempests of the breast is lifted from its feet by powers invisible with
which it has been playing, thinking them no stronger than a woman's
breath. That squall upon the instant levelled every dyke of
self-possession, took him from himself, and gave him to the force that
rules the world!

Like a man that grabs a hat blown down the road before him, he groped,
one moment, wildly, for that splendid confidence he had but
recently,—no use! the storm had swallowed it! And not without some
warnings, premonitions—he had shut his eyes to them deliberately, but
now he knew the very razor was compelled by a dangerous interest in
Janet Campbell, though he had been too timorous to admit it to himself!

Commingled with a great elation, such as always comes to healthy youth
when thrown in battle with the elements, was mixed a sense of shame that
he should have the girl at an advantage through that revelation of his
aunt. And still he was terrified to think that Annabel might be
mistaken!

All this commotion filled some moments only, if one counted
passion-hurricanes by time, which would be folly: he was much older when
he spoke again without a quiver in his voice, to show the girl that she
was separated only by about the thickness of a waistcoat from the stress
of weather.

“I did not know you had been calling," was all he said, and to himself
it sounded very thin. “And oh!" he thought, “I had the daring to put
arms about her!"

“Yes," she said, “I called," and suddenly grew very red again as she
bent above her work.

His education had not quite cleared out the rustic lout in him; a silly
boldness took the hold of him again, and “I'm vexed I was not in," said
he.

“And I was almost glad you weren't," she rejoined, and showed confusion
in her manner.

“Why not?" he asked. “And I had almost kissed her!" he reflected with
amazement to himself.

“For a private reason," she replied soberly. “It is of no consequence! I
think I hear my father."

To Æneas, even, this relief was opportune; so many doubts and guesses
seized him at the evidence of her perturbation that her father's
entrance was welcome, though immediately it roused the awkward thought
that even the discreetest reference to the dovecote and its problem was
become impossible. In Janet's presence it would feel indecent to pursue
the subject, which had someway lost importance in the last few minutes.

Ninian came in upon them bustling, like a man full-charged with news,
and only pulled himself together when he found he had a visitor.

He was, in a way, a young man still, to have a grown-up daughter; hardly
over forty, with a step like a dancing-master, and a swing about his
every movement betokening that he had some fancy of his limbs, whereof
so many people at that time of life appear to lose the relish. The
movement of his members seemed a pleasure to himself, as to a mountain
cat or stag; it looked as if he never would be weary. A little under
middle height, and lean about the flanks to which his square-cut coat
was closely shaped, he had, withal, a frame that looked exceedingly
robust, and even powerful—a square deep chest, and a leg with a
tumble-home (as the sailor says) above the rounded brawn. A charge of
horse, it might appear, would scarcely stagger him; he was a cliff.

In his face, that was weathered to the hue of nuts, clean shorn, and
slightly pitted, there was manifest a bold and confident sagacity; his
hair, dark red, was drawn back from his temples, and knotted with a
ribbon at the nape; his eyes appeared to have a living of their own
apart from all the rest of him—deep-set, and keen, and black, they were
his most conspicuous feature; nothing could escape, as it might seem,
their penetration.

“What! is it thyself that is in it, Æneas?" he cried in the phrase of
Gaelic though he spoke in English, an oddity of speech that always gave
his utterance a foreign sound. “Did I not say to myself in the street,
outbye, 'There is some one waiting on me!' I knew it by my feet! Stop
you, till I throw off my gentleman!" and plucking at the belt about his
middle, he loosed a slim dress sword that on his coming in had poked its
nose between his skirts.

“Now lie ye there, my lad!" said he, and flung it in below the table.
“As sure as death, my dear, I canna stand their slender ones, their
point-and-parry ones, their Sunday swords; give me a good broad leaf and
a basket to it, or a snedded stick of oak!"

“But still you would have it on this evening—you that never wears a
sword except for a bravado," said his daughter quietly, and still at
stitching.

“That was for Drimdorran's eye," said he, with a laugh. “He hates the
very look of weapons; it seems to put him aye at disadvantage, perhaps
because it shows him that he's dealing with a gentleman. That's the
gentleman of me for Duncanson!" and he kicked the tool below the table,
till it snarled back, clattering.

“Did ye bring yon, Æneas?" he asked, with a sudden turn upon his guest.

“Did I bring what?" asked Æneas.

Ninian wheeled round upon his daughter: “Did you not go for it,
m'eudail, as you promised?" he implored.

“I went," she answered, “but Æneas was not in, and I felt so foolish
upon such a message that I came away without a word to his aunt about
it."

“What was it?" Æneas asked, much damped at the suggestion in the
daughter's speech that the cause of her agitation in his uncle's house
was something that her father understood. He would have liked it
otherwise.

“I'll not be long in telling you that," said Ninian, standing to his
feet and throwing out a chest of resolution, as if to give him courage
for a task he felt ridiculous. “It's yon Molucca bean."

“Molucca bean?" repeated Æneas, perplexed.

“Ye know, yourself,—your father's—peace be wi' him! Yon Molucca
bean—the Virgin nut that came from Barra to your family. With the
silver clasps, ye mind?—the plump, round, brown fellow that would lie,
like, in the loof of a hand. For God's sake, Æneas, do not tell me ye
have gone and lost it! I'm sorely needin' it."

“I have you now!" said Æneas. “Of course! the bean my father had."

“The same!" said Ninian. “My grief! that your father had not got it with
him in Glenshiel! It would have been a different story yonder!"

“I think," said Æneas, “that I have it somewhere," and Ninian, clapping
on a chair in front of him, leaned in, and fixing him with a glance that
defied amusement, said, coaxing, “Ye will give me the loan of it,
loachain? What am I but going on a journey to the North? I said to
herself that's sewing there, 'If it's the bens and the mountain moors
for me again among yon devilish clans, I must have a backing with me,
and the very best I ken is Paul Macmaster's Virgin nut.' Did I not this
very evening send this lady over to your house to ask you for it? But
her courage faltered, and the half of her Macgregor too! Mo nàire!—my
shame upon you, daughter!"

“You can have it with all goodwill," said Æneas; “but what is the good
of it?"

At that was Ninian embarrassed; he puckered up his lips, as if to
whistle, drew down his lids a bit to hide for once unsteady eyes. The
man was plainly feeling shame to tell his purpose with the bean; he
started once or twice a stammering word, and stopped, and hummed and
hawed, and finally with a “pshaw!" turned round upon his girl with a
blameful aspect, charging her with having botched his errand.

“No wonder you are black affronted, like myself," said Janet soberly.
“Æneas must think you daft to put your trust in giseagachd—in freits
and talismans. In front of his Lowland aunt I could not say a word about
your Virgin nut, it seemed so foolish."

She turned to Æneas. “What my father wants it for," she said, “is for an
amulet. He thinks there will no harm come to him on his business in the
North if he has that thing about him."

“Neither there will! Neither there will!" her father burst out
confidently. “I don't believe, myself, there's anything at all in it,
except some old wife's story, but there's aye a chance. And I would be
the better for it in my pocket in among the rogues of Badenoch."

At this display of superstition Æneas could have burst out laughing, any
other place than here in Janet's presence and in her father's room, but
not a blink of his amusement did he show. He had forgotten all about
this wizard property in the bean from Barra.

Ninian was delighted to be promised that the charm would be handed to
him on the morrow, and to cover his confusion at having been discovered
with such a weakness, broke into a voluble account of a commission he
was just about to start upon. 'Twas he who had been in Drimdorran's
closet whence Æneas had heard the booming; he had been getting his
instructions for a journey to the North. There had been trouble with
some lawless clans. Arms were being smuggled in from Spain and Holland.
The Highland Watches were considered in some quarters dubious servants
of the king. Blackmail was rife as ever. Worst of all, there was the
opposition to the Road.

“George Wade's red sodgers, as ye ken," said Ninian, “have been for
years at the makin' o' the Big Road that is goin' to put the branks upon
the Hielanman—a bonny job for sodgers! It's killin', as ye might say,
the goose that lays the golden eggs, for, wi' this road across
Druim-Albyn, fighting will be by wi't in the Hielands and the trade o'
war will stop. But that's the way of it—the Road is cut already through
from Crieff to nearly Lovat's country; I trudged a bit o' the lower part
o' it myself last summer; most deplorable!—the look o' things
completely spoiled, and walkin' levelled to a thing that even cripples
could enjoy. A body might as well be on the streets! I'm tellin' you
that Road is goin' to be a rut that, once it's hammered deep enough,
will be the poor Gael's grave! There's plenty o' them wideawake to see
it; from the start they hindered Geordie's shovellin' brigade. But now
the Road's goin' through Clan Chattan country, the devil himsel's to
pay! Every now and then there is a skirmish wi' the sodgers. A bit of a
bridge or a culvert that is finished clean and ready on the Saturday is
all to smash between the kirks on Sunday. Boulders like a house for size
come stottin' down the hillside, landin' on the road. The very rivers
take a fancy, through the night, to start stravaigin', and where do ye
think should they stravaig but over the brawest parts o' Geordie's
track? Oh yes, they're clever fellows yonder! clever fellows!"

He smacked his lips upon his admiration for their cleverness, and then
became the Messenger-at-Arms.

“The Government is fair distracted, and of course it has to fall back on
Himsel'—MacCailein. It's his idea that the trouble on the Road is not
the wanton capers o' a lot o' unconnected gangs, but managed by a bond,
wi' someone cunning at the head, and indeed I wouldna say mysel' but
something's in that notion. All for your private ear, this! Not a word
to nobody! Whatever o't, Drimdorran sends for me this mornin', and claps
me down a letter from Lord Islay. He was himsel' so much against the
tenour o't that he wouldna even read it to me. I'm to go North and take
a look about me. . . . Nothing more or less than beachdair
business—you understand yourself!" and he gave a sly grin to Æneas. “I
can see it's no wi' old Drimdorran's will I'm goin'; it's too much of
the Royal recognition for his lordship, but he daren't go against his
master. But here am I, whatever of it, takin' to the hills for it on
Monday; I wish I had a smart young fellow wi' me, like yoursel', to keep
an eye behind me, but anyway you'll not forget yon nut!"

“You'll have it, sure!" said Æneas. “I'm thinking that I have so much of
luck just now I can afford to give a lend of it," and thereupon the
other gave a disconcerting start and took to pacing on the floor with
his hands plunged deep in his great wide waistcoat pockets.

“I'm not so sure of that," said he. “Ye're in the black books of
Drimdorran, someway; that's a thing I found this very evening. A ruddy
fury's on him; he could twist your neck!"

“In heaven's name, for what!" cried Æneas, astonished.

A disconcerting pause in her father's manner instantly sent Janet from
the room, and Æneas, too, got on his feet, alarmed at something in the
other's manner.

“At any rate, ye've put his birse up!" Ninian said. “What made ye miss
your evening lesson?"

“I was there at the usual time," said Æneas; “it was my pupils who
failed me."

Ninian looked sharply at him out of half-shut eyes and changed the
conversation. It was with thankfulness his visitor went with the object
of his call untouched on.




CHAPTER IV.

DRIMDORRAN.


From sound sleeping Æneas was wakened at a dark hour of the morning by
the rattling of sand on glass. He jumped from bed; threw up the window;
stuck his head out; saw a figure standing in the gutter of the lane.

“He's wanting you this instant, Master Æneas," said the Muileach
hoarsely. “Take my excuse for wakening you with a fistful of the
gravel."

“Who wants me?" said Æneas, and still with some of his sleep upon him.

“Who but Himself—Drimdorran? My loss! but we have had the night of it!
He's yonder like a man that would be in the horrors, tramping the
boards, Master Æneas, tramping the boards! And not a drop of drink in
him, no more than's in myself, though cold's the morning and I all
trembling."

“What hour is it?" asked Æneas, shivering; indeed the morn was bitter
cold.

“Five hours of the clock," said the messenger. “Sorry am I to turn ye
out like this before the bird has drunk the waters, but the man is
raging for ye, and when it comes to the bit with him, there is no one in
the leeward or in the windward, or in the four brown boundaries of the
deep, can hold a candle to him!"

Æneas drew in; threw on his clothes, and having given to the man a glass
of morning bitters, left a sleeping house and took to the road with him,
benumbed with wonder. Not one word of satisfaction could he get from the
excited messenger, only that Drimdorran House was not yet bedded and the
master clamant for his presence. They went up by the brawling river
through the woods that roared with wind. In the sky was not one twinkle
of a star, but when they reached the open glen, upon the dark as high as
ever was the light of half a dozen windows.

At the sight of them, high-hanging, something struck Drimdorran's man;
he stopped upon the road and slapped himself upon the haunch with an
exclamation. “Men and love!" says he, “if I have not clean forgot the
lady's letter till I saw her window yonder."

“What is't?" said Æneas, and had a billet thrust into his hand.

“Margaret gave it to me," said the Muileach. “She followed me like the
wind through half the grounds, and put it on to me as spells and charms
and crosses that I was to give it to yourself, and oh! the burraidh
that I am, did I not clean forget it in my thirst down yonder!"

“She's not up at this hour?" said Æneas, unbelieving.

“She has not put her wee round head to pillow!" said the Muileach.

Æneas had just one moment in the lobby of the house to turn the billet
outside in and read one frantic line: “For God's sake not a word to him
about the dovecote!" when Duncanson, with a flannel wrapped about him,
sodden-eyed for the want of sleep, and a cheek on him like rusted bone,
came out upon him from the closet.

“You're there," said he harshly, with a girn upon his face; “come this
way!" and Æneas, shaking in his shoes, went in behind him, looking at
the back of the old one's neck, for every hair was bristling on it.

The room was like an oven, from a fire piled high above the hobs with
sizzling timber; it was lit as for a wake with a dozen candles, three
upon the mantle, three upon the desk, the rest on brackets. For ordinar
that business-room, as Æneas saw it once a month when he came in to get
his wages, was as cold as charity, and as prim's a vestry; now was it
all disorder, and bestrewn with papers that had sluiced across the open
desk-flap to the floor. Duncanson, slipshod, ungartered, shut the door
with calculated thoroughness, swished through the mess himself
apparently had made by tearing out the desk's contents in some impatient
frantic search, and on the hearthstone turned upon Æneas a granite
visage.

“I want an explanation, sir," said he in a voice that choked with
passion. “What is this my daughter tells me of your taking William to
the town upon a gowk's errand?"

Æneas would have hardly known the man in any other situation! It was not
only that the sloven dress, the bald high head without its periwig, with
turgid veins upon the temples, the brindled tufts above the ears, were
new to him, but that the manner and the voice were so transformed.
Drimdorran hitherto in all their meetings, that were rare indeed and
formal, ever was the sleek well-mannered gentleman (a bit aloof) who
boomed in magisterial tones with an averted absent eye, as if his
eloquence was strengthened by an inward contemplation of the sort of man
he thought he was: his very post with Islay was maintained in measure by
his reputation for a gentlemanly presence and a suave though confident
address.

And now he was a bubblyjock—a frenzied turkey, gobbling his words; a
chin like to an adze, and the high points of his parchment face like
rust!

“Well, sir! Well, sir!" he cried out, clenching his fists and stamping,
“I'm waiting for your story!" for not a word at first could the tutor
say to him.

A moment since, and Æneas was in a panic, but this bullying approach
called up his pride and self-possession. At once he understood, in part
at least, the situation—Margaret had sacrificed him, and it was for him
to take the blame for her misdoing. But as yet he was not clear about
the nature of her story to her father; caution must be exercised. He
blandly took a chair.

“The thing can be explained," said he, and wondered where on earth the
explanation was to come from.

“I warrant it will take explaining!" screamed Drimdorran. “You make my
daughter, sir, the instrument of some scheme of yours, and got her to
send off my ward on a pretence that you desire his presence somewhere
else at eight o'clock than here, where you are paid to come and learn
him. He went to the town in search of you by her instructions: you were
not there——"

“I missed him by ten minutes," broke in Æneas, now seeing the way more
clear before him.

“You did sir, did ye! Where was ye?" shot Drimdorran at him.

“At Ninian Campbell's house," said Æneas, too quick for caution.

“At Ninian's—was Ninian there?"

“Most of the time, sir," answered Æneas; and the old man thrust a finger
at him. “Ye are a liar, sir!" he shouted. “Ninian was here, in this
room, at the very hour for which you trysted William in the town."

“I know," said Æneas. “All the same, I met him in his house later."

Drimdorran twitched the flannel wrap with nervous fingers, fumbled in
some inner pocket, and produced a horn from which he ladled snuff into
his nostrils like a man who hardly knew what he was doing. It seemed to
calm him somewhat; in a tone more settled yet with something crafty in
his eye, he put the very question that the tutor had been dreading.

“Was you, by any chance, with Margaret?"

“With Margaret! Not I!" said Æneas boldly, surprised to find so critical
a stage in his examination could so easily be passed by simply lying. He
looked for some sign of relief at this on the father's countenance, but
on the contrary he found dismay. It looked as if the man was on the
point of whimpering!

“You will not bamboozle me, sir!" he protested furiously. “I am not so
blind! You were in this house, I learn, at the usual hour you meet your
pupils; you went out when you found they were not here—as no doubt you
had been aware,—and you were back again. What were you doing, sir, in
the interregnum?"

“I was on some strictly private matters of my own," said Æneas, no
longer even anxious to be civil, and at that Drimdorran made three
scuffling steps from the hearthstone to him with the squeal of a rabbit
trapped, as if to catch him by the throat.

Up started Æneas with a front of resolution, and the nostrils of him
flaring, which perceiving, Duncanson stopped short and stood a moment
swaying on his feet like one that had a stroke. The notion came to Æneas
as he stood looking at him, he had never rightly seen the man before,
but always in a mask or a veneer, made up of clothes and studied
manners; this creature, stripped of all that gave to him the semblance
of a person schooled and prudent, stood stark-nakedly revealed a savage,
club or dagger only wanting to give murder to his passion. Under eaves
as coarse as heather were his eyes recessed and glinting like an
adder's.

With a dry gulp of the throat he pulled himself together, turned sudden
on his heel, and sought his desk to scrabble with a hand among the
papers. He brought one out of a pigeon-hole and ran a finger down its
lines.

“The term of your engagement as young Campbell's tutor ends next week,"
said he—“to be precise, on Thursday the twenty-fifth. I have had no
instructions from his lordship to extend—so far as I am concerned, it
is an end to your incumbency,—it is neither for his son's advantage nor
for mine that you should any longer come about my house. I will report
to his lordship, and you need not put yourself to the trouble of coming
back to implement the week that is to run of your engagement. Your money
will be sent."

“My terms," said Æneas, as cool as ice, “were made with Islay."

“They were," said Duncanson, sneering, “and much against my will. But I
was here to keep an eye on your deportment, and it does not please me."

“I'll write to him in the first instance," said Æneas. “This sudden
stoppage of my office calls for more explanation."

Drimdorran turned on him with a voice that was hoarse with fury. “If it
comes to that," said he, “there will be several other points demanding
explanation. I have made no charge against ye on another matter that I
would be loth to lay before his lordship,—I found last night that some
one had been tampering with my keys and with this desk," and he slapped
an open hand upon it. “No, no! I make no charges, mind!" he cried as
Æneas started blurting out denials. “I'm only telling you; you'll see at
once it looks gey bad against you! My keys were lifted from a room
upstairs; my private desk was rummaged, to what purpose detrimental to
his lordship's private interests I canna say. They were replaced, I
found, about the very time that you came back."

“It seems a small affair to make so much ado about," said Æneas, with
more composure than he felt, and realising now how justified was
Margaret's terror lest her escapade should be revealed.

“Ado! Ado!" Drimdorran shouted, jumping to his feet. “By God, sir, I
could have ye jyled for less. It's not a small affair to pry in lockfast
places, I'll assure you!"

“Small enough, being only a supposition, to haul a man from bed at this
hour of morning," Æneas retorted, and now he fairly sweated in the
suffocating heat to which the old man's fury seemed contributory. He
turned to leave the room. “The matter can be settled in a better air and
at a wiser hour," he said, upon the threshold. “I'll see you when I talk
it over with my uncle."

He got outside the door with Duncanson behind him pressing so close he
felt his breathing.

“If I were you," said Duncanson, “I would consider about consulting any
one regarding such a thing. I make no public charge against you, mind,
except that you have been neglectful of your duties in this instance,
and have tricked your pupils."

“That's a point, sir, that I'll ask you to remit to my own judgment,"
said Æneas quietly.

“Please yourself," said the old man, “only I'll advise you not to say
too much about it to the mealmonger," and with a bang he shut the closet
door.

The tutor groped his way along the passage, more furious within himself
at this last insult to his uncle than with all that had preceded. He had
just got to the exit from the house when he heard light running steps
behind him; stopped, and found his elbow grasped by Margaret.

“Oh, Æneas!" she whispered in a voice of the greatest tribulation, “what
happened?"

It was the first time she had ever called him by his Christian name, and
that, in some way, instantly dispelled the angry feeling that he had to
be her victim. He was sorry for her—that she should be child to such a
man.

“Do not vex yourself," he said to her softly. “You are quite secure. He
does not know."

“But he is furious; I heard him shouting to you! And what a night we
have passed! He has been like one deranged. Oh, Æneas! I meant to tell
him everything, but when I saw his state I daren't."

“Indeed," said Æneas ruefully, “it is a pickle we are into. You have put
back the keys?"

“The keys, but not the box," she answered. “I had the keys restored
before you came that last time, and since then I have not had a chance
to put the box back."

“I think he has not missed it yet," said Æneas. “At all events, he has
not charged me with it; that's about the only insult that he spared me.
Upon my word the man is crazy! And now I'm on my warning; my tutoring is
at an end."

On hearing this she fell to silent weeping, hanging to his arm. The
fanlight of the door let in the break of morning, and they were revealed
to one another something like to phantoms grey and bloodless.

“Oh!" she said with passion, “you must think me an abandoned wretch! It
was because I could not rid myself of William any other way, and I was
keen to see the doocot, that I told him you were waiting for him in the
town. And now my father thinks the thing was planned between us to get
rid of Will. It is not fair to you—I'll tell him everything."

“Margaret!" her father's voice came bawling from the lobby, “are ye
there?"

“Tell him nothing," Æneas whispered; he could see that shout already
shake her resolution. “I can thole his anger: what's the odds to me?"




CHAPTER V.

A CALL TO THE NORTH.


The morning bell was ringing when he reached the town. Salt airs from
sea were blowing through the lanes. Men at the harbour, dragging ropes,
cried cheerfully. Oh, the bold, cold, hard, beautiful world! He felt
like one that had come out from fever-rooms among the hearty bustle of
the quay to which he went immediately to seek his uncle, who was there
already at the loading of the Good Intent with timber baulks for Skye.

In half a dozen sentences he told his story, only keeping back Miss
Margaret's prank with the forbidden keys, the meeting in the dovecote,
and the shameful charge against himself to which her subterfuge had made
him liable. Now that it was daylight, which brings caution and cools
down the ardours of the night, he saw quite clearly that the girl was
much to blame, deserving of no shelter, but he would be the very last to
punish her. Rather would he stay silent, suffering Duncanson's
suspicions if they went no further. The situation as presented to his
uncle, too, was just in keeping with that gentleman's predictions.

“I told ye!" he declared when Æneas reported that the tutoring was
ended, and that Drimdorran had some fancy that the pupil and her tutor
had, between them, planned the missing of the evening lesson; “I saw it
coming! That girl a while ago was daft about ye; any one could see it in
the kirk on Sundays! I would be much surprised if old Drimdorran didna
notice. And that doesna fall in wi' his plans at all; he's set on having
her for Campbell."

“He's welcome so far as I am concerned," said Æneas.

“Are ye sure, man?" said his uncle. “Till last night I thought
different. I didna tell your aunt nor say to you that Will's being on
the quay at the hour he should be at his tasks looked gey and curious.
For he was asking about you. He said he had been sent by Margaret to
meet ye here, and that I couldna fathom, seeing you were gone as usual
to Drimdorran House."

“That was some caprice of Margaret's," said Æneas. “She herself had
shirked the lesson."

“Ye werena with her somewhere?" said the uncle drily, and Æneas looked
blank to have the very keystone of his secret tapped so soon. He did not
answer.

“Man!" cried his uncle, comprehending, as he fancied, “ye have put your
foot in it wi' Sandy! I knew if ye gave him the slightest reason to
think ye were trifling wi' his girl and spoiling sport with Campbell, he
would squeal. The man is fairly cankered wi' ambeetion; all his body's
hoved wi' vanity since he became a laird and stepped into the property
that should be yours. It's six-and-twenty years since he came here, no
better than a packman, to be clerk to old Macgibbon. He played cuckoo
wi' poor Macgibbon, and secured the factorship wi' Islay. Then he
trafficked with your father, managing for him when he was off upon his
silly escapades among the Jacobites, much against my will, and God be
wi' him! No one better knew than old Drimdorran what your father was
conniving at in France, and in the North wi' Glendaruel, and the damned
old rogue, I'll swear, encouraged him, well knowing what the end would
be. He leased Drimdorran from your father, who could never stay at home
after your mother died, and got him in his debt for loans, the size of
which gave me the horrors when I saw the bills. What your father did
with all that money God Almighty knows! unless, like Glendaruel, he
scattered it among the disaffected clans. I couldna pay them off,
whatever o't, when your father died; I wasna then in the position. When
your father's name was plastered at the cross a rebel at the horn and
outlawed—him a corp up yonder in Kintail,—I went and saw the man that
he had supped and drank wi', played the cartes and fished and worked at
pigeons wi', and he was rowtin' like a bull about his loss. Not the loss
o' his friend, ye'll mind! but of the money he had lent him. He
staggered me by bringing out a deed in which your father pledged
Drimdorran as the bond for Duncanson's accommodations, but he doubted,
by his way o't, if the deed would hold against a property in danger of
escheat for treason. Sly devil! Well he kent MacCailein could put that
all right! And there he sits, this fourteen years,—a son of
Para-na-muic of Gunna—the Gentleman from Coll, and bonny on the
gentleman! What will please him now but that Lord Islay's boy should get
him grandsons! If it werena for Lord Islay—honest man!—ye wouldna dare
have put a foot within Drimdorran's door! And on my soul, I'm glad ye're
bye wi' him and his; I've something better for ye!"

For some time past the tutoring engagement had appeared scarcely worthy
of his nephew to the Bailie. Æneas, to tell the truth, was something of
a disappointment to his uncle who had reared him, sent him to the
college with Lord knew what object, though the Law was mentioned, and
some study of the same had sent him later on to Holland, where he met
with Islay. But Æneas no more regarded Law than cutting breckans; his
heart was all in pictures and poetry,—very pretty things, no doubt, but
scarcely with a living in them.

Many a time, since he came back, the Bailie spoke to Annabel about the
possibility of giving him an interest in the business. She liked the
notion well enough in some ways, but she had a hankering to keep the lad
a gentleman,—a gentleman to her idea being one who lived in some
ambiguous way without a shop or vulgar occupation.

“Do ye think, a' ghalaid! I'm no gentleman?" her man would ask.

“Ah! but you're different," she would tell him. “Æneas, by rights,
should be Drimdorran, and nae Drimdorran ever fyled his hands wi'
merchandise."

“A sight better if they did, my dear," said Alan-Iain-Alain Og, far
sundered from his family traditions. “It was better for Paul if he had
dealt in stots and queys that's very good for folk, and profitable,
rather than be scampering about the country herdin' French recruits and
breeding trouble. What did he make of it, poor man? He's yonder in
Kintail, and Duncanson, the man o' business, sleeping in his blankets.
And as for me, myself, I'm proud to be a merchant! I owe no man a penny,
and your gentlemen are in my books. There's some of the finest family
gentlemen, as ye think them, canna sleep at night for thinking what I'm
thinking o' their bills, and all the time I'm sleeping sound and never
bothering. It's quite enough for me that they're harassed."

The sudden termination, then, of Æneas's office gave the very
opportunity the Bailie wished for. It was so opportune that the occasion
of it never caused him any feeling of annoyance; at the hour of
breakfast he was full of schemes for launching Æneas on a career as
merchant.

The Bailie's schemes had their dependence on the great New Road that
Marshal Wade was cutting through the mountains. Hitherto the peaceful
Lowland world—the machar of the Gall, the plains town-crowded,
bartering with England, making money—was, in a fashion, sundered wholly
from the world above the Forth. The Grampians, like ramparts, stood
between two ages, one of paper, one of steel; on either side were
peoples foreign to each other. Since roads had been in Scotland they had
reached to Stirling, but at Stirling they had stopped, and on the castle
rock the sentinel at nightfall saw the mists go down upon a distant land
of bens and glens on which a cannon or a carriage wheel had never yet
intruded. Only the bridle-paths to kirk and market, the drove-track on
the shoulders of the hills!

Now was the furrow being made, as Ninian said, on which to drive the
Gael like bridled oxen—smooth, street-wide, a soldier's road, cut
straight across the country through the thickest-populated valleys, till
it reached the shores of Moray and the forts that stretched from sea to
sea.

In this New Road the merchant saw his opportunity. Always to the inner
parts of Inverness it had been ill to get his goods in winter time with
vessels weather-bound among the isles or staggering round Cape Wrath.
Now he saw a chance of opening communication by a route as safe as the
King's highway to London, and already was MacCailein talking of a branch
into Argyll.

Annabel, in the nerves about her nephew's sudden stop as tutor, that day
at least got little satisfaction for her curiosity; the big grey map of
Blaeu that hung in the lobby was spread out upon the table; and her
husband, stretched across it like a sailor, marked the track the New
Road took through country in the chart set down without a line to break
its rough ferocity.

“It may be a sodger's road," he cried to Æneas, “but it's just the very
thing for merchant waggons. It's true we're off the line a bit, but I
have the Red One's word that there's a lot of roads in view across the
country, and in the meantime I could send my wintering straight from
Leith to Stirling. And then what have I on the either hand of me for a
hundred miles or more but the very pick o' people—Menzies, Robertsons,
Stewarts, the Athole men, Clan Chattan, and the Frasers!"

“A bonny lot!" said Annabel. “No' a pair o' breeks among them!"

“We'll soon put breeks on them, the Duke and me, a' ghalaid!" said her
husband cheerily, plucking up the waistband of his trousers. “Stop you!"

“It's not so much at first what I'll put into them," he said to Æneas,
“it's only meal, eight merk the eight stone boll, and salt perhaps to
start with; herring maybe, and an anker now and then of brandy for the
gentry, but it's what I'll lift from them in beef. It's just a great big
breeding-ground for stots! And look at all them Great Glen lochs and
rivers—full o' salmon! There's a man in Inverness called Stuart has the
pick just now of all their kippered fish, but I'll be learning him!"

“The only thing," said Æneas, “I know about it is that there's a lot of
trouble on the Road at present." And he told of Ninian's mission.

“Ye tell me Ninian's going!" cried his uncle. “That is better still! My
notion was to send ye round by Crieff, but what's to hinder ye to go
with him?—ye may be sure he'll take the nearest way for it: for all
that he is tainted in his name, the man's an education."

He dashed more heatedly than ever into Æneas's immediate occupation. If
Ninian would take Æneas in his company they might be in the North by
Michaelmas, or at the very latest by St Martin's Day, when lairds and
tenantry alike were desperate for money. Æneas, in Inverness, would have
the money, in buinn oir and bank notes—three hundred pounds of it,
enough to make the Hielandmen run wild; the Bailie, for a wonder, had
the cash that moment at his hand. Mackay, his correspondent in the town
of Inverness, would give the lad an insight to the market situation, go
about with him, and show him where to look for freights and either come
to terms for barter or buy stuff for money down.

“Ye'll find a lot of them will want the money," said his uncle in the
Gaelic. “Money is the boy in Gaeldom! It's seldom that they hear the
cheery chink of it."

Chinking his coin, then, Æneas was to spend a while in bargaining for
salmon crops from Beauly, timber from Glen-Moriston; if occasion
offered, herring, cod, or mackerel for Spain. But what his uncle most
insisted on was careful study of the Road, and what there might be in it
for his trade.

It was but ruefully at first that Æneas spent that morning with the map
and Alan-Iain-Alain Og's commercial dreams. It seemed to him a sad
come-down in life from Cæsar and the bards, but what was he to do? He
looked across his uncle's back, and through the window, at the seagulls
swooping in the wind above the ferry, and felt that what was here
proposed was shackles for the spirit, mean engagements.

But one word of the Bailie's cleared away his vapours, and it was the
word Adventure.

“It's just a bit of an adventure," said the Bailie. “That's the thing
wi' me in business, otherwise it wasna worth a docken leaf!"

At that word Æneas took another look at Blaeu, and there at last he saw
the marvel of the North as Blaeu had figured it—the mountains heaped
like billows of the sea, the ranging bens, the glens with rivers coiling
in them; great inland lochs and forests. He saw high-sounding names like
Athole, Badenoch, and Brae Lochaber, Lorn and Spey; they moved him like
a story. All his days had they been known to him, but mistily and more
as things of fable than of actual nature—lands of the fancy only, like
the lands of Ossian, figuring in winter songs and tales of old revenge.

Now, to his uncle's great astonishment, he leapt on Blaeu, and with his
chest upon the parts he knew, he peered, transported, on that legendary
region of the boisterous clans, still in the state of ancient Gaul, and
with Gaul's customs. The very names of castles, passes, straths,
misspelled, entranced him: everything was strange and beckoning.
Moreover, it had been the country of his father's wanderings, somewhere
there his father had been slain, somewhere there was buried. The
reflection shook him.

“Where does it lie," he asked in his mother tongue, “the place of my
father's changing? I do not see its name." And someway all at once he
felt the climate of his mind had altered, and the North was plucking at
his bosom.

The other answered solemnly. “Of what blood art thou, young Angus, that
cannot hear the name cry grievously upon the paper! There it
is—Kintail! Black be the end of that Kintail that finished him!" Not
the merchant spoke but kinship; on the forehead of Macmaster swept the
dark cloud of undying hate. His visage was convulsed; he smote upon the
map; he seemed that moment like a man a million miles remote from the
world of ledgers.

“Dear me!" cried Annabel, “ye shouldna swear like that before a lady,
even in the Gaelic."

“I wasna swearing, m'eudail," he assured her, scarcely cooling. “I was
only speaking of my brother Paul." He turned again to Æneas. “I'm not
forgetting, mind," says he, with bitterness. “For me the claymore's by
wi't, but I'm fighting wi' MacCailein. These blackguards in the North
brought out your father—the very men I'm selling meal and wine to; many
a time I wish to heaven it would choke them! Do you think it's what I
make of it in siller that's the pleasure of my trading wi' the North? If
it was only siller I would never seek to sell an ounce beyond Loch Fyne.
Na! na! there's more than that in it—I'm smashing them, the very men
that led my brother Paul astray. MacCailein and me! MacCailein and me!
And now there's Marshal Wade and his bonny Road that's going to make the
North a land for decent folk to live in! I have the bills o' men like
Keppoch and Glengarry flourishing about the Lowlands in the place o'
paper money; they're aye gettin' a' the dreicher at the payin', but
whatever comes o't I have got them in my grasp. It's no' the common
people, mind!—the poor and faithful clansmen—but their lairds and
chiefs I'm after, them your father marched wi' in his folly, blind to
their self-interest, thinking they were only out for James."

“I'll go!" cried Æneas, almost lifted from his feet; the soul of him
seemed filled with some dread pleasure.

“Of course ye'll go! That's what the Road's for—you and me and
vengeance. Look at it!"—with a piece of keel he drew a line from
Stirling far north on the map to Lovat's country. “That's the Road the
harrow is to go to level down the Hielands, and I have put a lot of seed
in there already that is bound to come to crop. Once the New Road is
finished, and the troopers and the guns and my carts on it, it's an end
to the dominion o' the chiefs! The North, just now, might be in Africa,
for all we ken about it; nobody dare venture there except wi' arms."

“Does the law not run there?" Æneas asked.

“Law run!" the Bailie cried with mockery. “It runs like fury—and the
clansmen at its heels. Ask you Ninian! I'll no' say that he ever ran
himsel', but many a time he had a smart bit step for it! Of course ye'll
take a weapon, if it is nothing better than a wee Doune pistol, and at
anyrate it canna be so bad upon the Road,—there's always sodgers back
and forward from the barracks."

“It's no' wi' my consent ye're goin', but I hope ye'll walk wi'
caution," said his aunt.

“Six years ago I darena send ye," said his uncle. “Ye might lie and rot
for years in Castle Dounie dungeons and nobody would ken your fate
except old Simon Lovat and his warders. That's the head and front of
them—the fox! I ken him, and I've bought his fish—a double-dealing
rogue that's married on a decent woman, Primrose Campbell, daughter of
Mamore."

“Poor Prim!" said Annabel, “I'm vexed for her; I don't know what on
earth possessed her to take up wi' such a man!"

“Nor I," said the Bailie. “Nor what on earth it was that made MacCailein
and Lord Islay let her marry him. That's the sort o' man the Road's to
put an end to; some day yet, if he is spared, ye'll see his head upon a
stob and it no' very bonny! Mind I'm telling ye! There's no' a roguery
in the North for forty years he hasna had a hand in—one day wi' the
Jacobites, the next day wi' the others. Many an honest man he hanged
before his windows or sent to the plantations. God knows who he has in
yon bastile o' his in irons! It's the only quarrel that I have with
Himself here that he maintains a correspondence wi' the fellow.
'Policy,' says MacCailein wi' a cough, but any one that plays at
politics wi' Lovat has a tarry stick to hold. And still, were it not for
Simon's runners coming here wi' letters for Himself so often, we would
ken no more about what's happening in the shire of Inverness than if it
was Jerusalem, though every messenger he sends, as Ninian tells me, is
as sly's himself. Far is the cry to Castle Dounie, and it's steep on
Corryarrick! Not a whisper will come over Corryarrick that he doesna
want. But the Road's going over Corryarrick, and the end of Sim's at
hand, and of his kind! Perhaps when it is finished we will hear what
happened Lady Grange; since she was lifted near a twelvemonth since in
Edinburgh nobody has found her whereabouts, and Lovat gets the blame for
her trepanning. I wouldna put it past him! He's a dirty brock!"

*        *        *        *        *

The tutor's stipend came that afternoon to him from Duncanson, and with
it came a little scrape of letter that confirmed his liberation from an
office that had all at once become repugnant. It looked as if Drimdorran
meant to have a plausible excuse for his suspension; the story, later in
the day, went round that Islay's son was going to the college of St
Andrews.

Æneas at once went to the Messenger-at-Arms to ask him when he meant to
set out for the North.

“I'll soon can tell ye that!" said Ninian, and showed to him a knapsack.
He turned it out upon a form. It held a shirt or two, some hose, a pair
of brogues, a shagreen case of razors, a pot of salve, a Bible, and a
dirk. “The Bible," he explained with gravity, “is for the thing that is
within us all, but the dirk is for my own particular skin; what else
would any man be needing but his wits about him and a coin or two? Have
ye the nut, my hero?"

Æneas had the nut.

“And now I'm all complete!" said Ninian, quite contented.

“It would be better, would it not, with a companion?" Æneas said to him.

“Ha, ha! You may be sure I thought of that," said Ninian, “and I've got
him—there he is, the brave grey lad, and he not slender!" and with a
movement of the haunch he brought to view the basket of a claymore,
tucked away so sly below the skirts of him, its presence hitherto had
been invisible.

“That's him," he said,—“Grey Colin, sober as a wife and sharper in the
tongue."

“I was thinking of a man with you," said Æneas.

“Another man's legs are no use for my travelling," said Ninian; “I'm
better with my three fine comrades—courage, sense, and foresight."

“What I thought," said Æneas, “was you might take me: I'm finished with
the tutoring, and my uncle wants me to go North on business."

“Oh ho!" cried Ninian, sharp-looking at him. “That's the way the wind
blows, is it? I'll take the last thing in my mind the first, and tell ye
this, that I'm the man that's willing, if you can have your pack made up
to-morrow morning. I'm starting at the skirl of day myself, but whether
you're to leave the town with me or not will have to be considered. Now
for the first thing in my mind, and most important—what ails Drimdorran
at ye?"

“Young Campbell's going to St Andrews," said Æneas uneasily, and
Ninian's eyes half shut.

He placed the plenishing of his knapsack back with some deliberation,
whistling to himself the tune of “Monymusk," then put the Molucca bean
with care in a pouch he had inside his coat below his elbow, where was a
small black knife; but all without a word, and Æneas felt mightily
uncomfortable.

“What's in my mind," at last said Ninian, turning on him quickly, “is
that if you're going with me, you'll need to be as open as the day. I'm
deep enough for two of us whatever—that's my trade, and I want nothing
muffled in my comrade. Stop, stop!"—for Æneas was about to blurt the
truth—“I'm asking nothing, mind! But at the very start ye try to blind
me with this story of young Campbell going to St Andrews, and I'm not so
easy blinded. I asked what ailed Drimdorran at ye! Last night the man
was in a fury. What's more, he never put his head to pillow, and he sent
for ye this morning at an hour when gentlemen are snoring. It's not for
nothing that the falcon whistles—is he blaming ye for Margaret?"

“That's the truth," admitted Æneas. “I thought for her sake it was
better not to mention it. But the man's mistaken; there is nothing in
it."

“Just that!" said Ninian dryly. “Whether there is or not is none of my
affair at all, at all; but it makes a difference in the way we'll have
to start for Inverness. It would never do in the circumstances for the
two of us to leave this town together like a cow and a veal at her tail.
Myself I'm going by Glen Aray and the Orchy. I might have tried Glen
Lochy, but I want to see some salmon in a linn that's close to
Arichastlich, and forbye, I ken the folk that's in Glenorchy—decent
people though they're no' Macgregors! It would not hinder you, now, to
start on a road of your own. It might be that you would be going to the
Lowlands, like," and he gave a wink of great significance, and stuck his
tongue out in the corner of his mouth. “There's not a finer glen in
Albyn than Glen Croe, and you would, let us be saying, take the track
across Glen Croe down to Loch Lomond. But you would kind of shift your
mind about the Lowlands when ye got to that fine water, and start up
Glen Falloch, and who would I be seeing in the evening at the Bridge of
Orchy change but young Macmaster! My welcome to him, I'll can swear,
would be in grandeur and in splendour!"

“Very well; so be it!" said Æneas. “You are riding?"

“Indeed and I'm not!" said Ninian firmly. “Only to the length of Bridge
of Orchy, just to show my friends upon the road I'm not a man that needs
to wear shoe-leather. From there I'm sending back the horse by a man
that's coming that length with me. After that I'll stretch out like a
warrior and take my shanks to it. Ye'll need a horse, so far, yourself,
or else I'll have to wait a day for ye."

“I'll take a horse to Bridge of Orchy too," said Æneas, “and send it
back or sell it as my uncle may advise."

“You see, a horse is not much use on my affairs," said Ninian. “It's
something like two extra pair of legs—an awkward thing to have about
ye; it looks too much like business in a hurry, and I like to give the
notion that I'm daundering at my ease. Ye canna hide a horse behind a
bush of juniper nor take it crawling wi' ye up a burn, and it's aye
another thing to run the risk of losing. Nothing better than the shanks,
my hero! and ye'll see a good deal more on them than cocked upon a
saddle. Ye'll need a pickle money."

“In that I'm likely to be well enough provided," answered Æneas. “I'll
have three hundred pound about me."

“What!" cried Ninian. “Through Lochaber! God be about us! am I to travel
wi' a banker's vault? Ye havena robbed Drimdorran, have ye?"

“No," said Æneas, laughing, and explained the nature of his mission to
the North.

“Not a word about it then!" said Ninian. “It's not that stealing money
is a habit with the folk we're going among, poor bodies! They never
touch a thing but bestial, and perhaps, at whiles, a web of clothing,
but at this time o' the year, wi' Crieff Tryst comin' on, there's many a
droll stravaiger stopping at the inns and changes we'll be sleeping in,
if sleeping's going to be a thing we're going to waste much time on, and
a man wi' all that money on him would be smelling like a spirit keg for
their temptation."

In the midst of their discussion, further, on the preparations for the
journey, Janet entered, and at the sight of her, for Æneas the zest of
the adventure flattened. It was not frosty wells she was to-day but ice
itself, until her father told her Æneas was going with him, when she
brightened.

“But why not all the way together?" she inquired, surprised to learn
they were to take such devious ways into Breadalbane.

“Because, my lass, our friend here's leaving not in the friendliest trim
with Mr Duncanson," said Ninian, “and I've no mind to vex that bonny
gentleman until we have the width of two good parishes between us. He
seems so little taken up, himself, with my bit jaunt on Islay's
business, that he might be glad of any excuse to put it off. And indeed,
forbye, it is a splendid chance for Æneas here to see Glen Falloch. It's
a place I'm very fond of."

“It seems a queer-like start," she said with puzzled brows, “but anyway
I'm glad my father is to have your company." She turned upon the young
man rather warmer. “You will find him," she said, “a kind of crooked
stick to take the road with on the forests and the mountain moors."

“It's ill to take the crook out of an old stick," said Ninian blythly,
“but sometimes it's as good as any other for the business."

“I hope you'll see that he will not go wandering about too much at
night; that will always be the time when I'm most anxious for this
man—this wild young dad of mine."

“And that's the very time when I am surest of myself," cried Ninian. “My
name's Macgregor and the fog's my friend! I'm thinking, too, you couldna
send a better man wi' me to watch me in the night; he has that turn
himsel'!" And there he gave a nudge to Æneas.

Æneas flushed before the level glance she gave him upon this.

“There's one thing I hope," she said, “and that is that you are not in a
desperate hurry to get North or to get back again, for my father is a
man who makes little speed through any country where there is a fish to
catch."

“I'll do my best," said Æneas, “to keep him from his angling."

“It will be hard," she said. “A rod and a river-side for father, and the
day slips by! It is like life itself and us, poor things! at playing."

With a breast tumultuous Æneas went home, and with the help of Annabel
prepared for a departure so precipitous she almost wept about it.




CHAPTER VI.

THE ANGLER.


A better day for travel never shone, and Æneas rode through it till the
gloaming with uplifted spirit on a track that, till he reached Loch
Lomond, gave no trouble to his riding, for, so far, it was the trail to
Lowland markets, and the very rock of it was stripped by feet of men and
beast. The way was new to him; he saw the wild abyss below Ben Arthur
and Ben Ime with wonder, gladdened in the salt breeze of the yellow
beaches of Loch Long, and, having come to Tarbet, rested. His way was
rougher in the afternoon—along Loch Lomond-side and through Glen
Falloch, where Macfarlane crofts were thick upon the braes, and folks
were harvesting, and it was not yet dusk when he passed through Tyndrum.
There was he on the main route of the Appin drovers and the men from
Skye; a change-house by the wayside hummed like a skep of bees with
voices, and a field beside the change was occupied by big-horned shaggy
cattle bellowing.

Two or three men came out and looked at him when he rode past,
themselves no gentler-looking than their herds,—thick, hairy fellows,
wearing tartan, one of them at least in fier of war with a target on his
back and a leather coat.

Æneas gave a wave in by-going.

“You're surely at the start of fortune, trim young lad, to be at the
riding for't," cried out the fellow of the targe: “come in and drop your
weariness!" and Æneas looked at him again—he was so like a Roman, with
bare knees!

But he went on, unheeding them, and by-and-by his track rose up among
the heather for a bit above a plain all strewn with shingle of the
winter storms, and there he saw the sun go down upon the wild turmoil of
bens they called the Black Mount of Breadalbane. The dark was on when he
came to the Bridge of Orchy, and the sky all shivering with stars.

There, too, were droves of cattle round the inn; no sooner had he
clattered in upon the hamlet than a score of men were out upon him, even
shaggier than the fellows of Tyndrum, and only reassured about the
safety of their charges when they found he was a gentleman alone.

The inn was shabby to the point of scandal, no better than a common
tavern, smoke-blackened, smelling of the reek of peat and mordants used
in dyeing cloth; lit by cruisies, going like a fair with traffic. In the
kitchen of it men were supping broth with spoons chained to the tables,
and a lad with his head to the side as if in raptures at his own
performance stood among the ashes with a set of braying bagpipes.

“Failte!" said the landlord courteously to Æneas. “Stick your horse in
anywhere, just man, and what's your will for supper?"

“Cook for me a bannock and roast a cock," said Æneas, like a traveller
of the hero stories.

The landlord had the hue of drink upon him, and seemed in a merry key.

“Son," said he (and he, too, thinking of the story), “wouldst thou
prefer the big bannock of my anger or the little wee bannock and my
blessing?" and Æneas laughed. He took a squint at the baking-board upon
the dresser, and said he, more wisely—

“I think we will not mind the bannock, big or little, but I have a
friend who should be here by this time from Glen Orchy, and the bird
will do between us."

He had hardly put his horse into a stall when the company burst out
again upon the house-front at a clack of hooves, and going out himself
he heard the voice of Ninian. Before he could address him, Ninian was
off the saddle at a jump, had ordered his attendant to put up the horses
for the night, and dashed into the inn without the slightest notice of
his friend.

“What is wrong?" asked Æneas, following him.

“Nothing at all," said Ninian cautiously in English, with a look about
him at the drovers. “But ye'll be better in your bed before the man
that's with me there puts bye the beasts. I wouldn't for the world that
he would see us here together."

“I'm sorry to be such a bother to you," said Æneas stiffly. “I thought
the width of two good parishes between you and Drimdorran made you
master of yourself!"

“That's the best word ever I heard from ye!" said Ninian heartily. “I'm
glad to see ye have your tongue, and I'm thinking we'll get on no' bad
together. But still-and-on I'm serious about that fellow with me, and if
we can get a chamber by ourselves I'll tell ye what's my reason."

The only chamber they could get was that in which they were to sleep,
and that not stately. Thither were they led by the landlord's wife, who
said the fowl was now at plucking for their supper, and when the door
was shut on her, Ninian turned on Æneas and looked him firmly in the
eye.

“Ye didna tell me all, my lad," says he, “about Drimdorran's anger. I'm
doubting you're a close one!"

“What else have you been hearing now?" asked Æneas, greatly downed.

“When I was coming up the glen this morning he was out upon the road
with letters for my man to leave round here, but I was not long of
learning that he knew you were away from Inveraray, and what he really
wanted was to know if I could tell your destination. That, I'll assure
ye, put me in a corner. But I was able for his lordship! 'By all
accounts,' says I, 'he is riding to the Lowlands.' Then what in all the
earth should happen but Drimdorran burst upon you for a thief——"

“Now is not that the swine!" cried Æneas, furious.

“Stop you! I knew the man was talking nonsense, and I was right, for in
a bit the only thing he had against you was a snuffbox. But a body more
concerned about a snuffbox never breathed the morning air of Scotland!
He swore he would be even with you if ye ever set a foot again within
the barony. You will see yourself, now, the position I was in—I had
myself to think about as well as you, and if I was kent to be tramping
through the North in company with the gentleman who stole the snuffbox,
after telling Old Drimdorran yon about the Lowlands road, it would not
look respectable."

“Good God!" cried Æneas, “you're surely not believing that I have the
body's snuffbox!"

“Tach! What's the odds about a paltry snuffbox?" Ninian said lightly.

“But, man! I haven't got it! It's yonder in his house," cried Æneas.
“Will you not believe me?"

“I believe every word of you," said Ninian, “but if there's not a
snuffbox missing, what's the cause of yon one's tirravee?"

“I'll tell you that," said Æneas, and straightway laid before him all
his tale without a word of reservation. Away from Janet Campbell's
presence the dovecote incident now appeared quite innocent; he did not
even baulk to tell Drimdorran's charge about the desk.

“If ye had told me this before," said Ninian, “I could have cleared the
air for you. It's droll that my girl Janet should jalouse the truth
before myself. She didna know, of course, about the doocot, but she
guessed ye were with Margaret somewhere when ye should have been at your
tasks whenever I said that Drimdorran had been angry looking for ye. Now
I can tell ye something. When I was there colloguing with Drimdorran in
his closet, he turned him from the window once as he was walking up and
down the room, and with a changed complexion made a dash to look his
desk; he went out of the room and in again like lightning. 'Ye havena
seen the young folk?' he inquired of me, and I had not, but thought ye
would be at your lessons. Ye werena there, he said, and out again and
left me cooling twenty minutes, by my lone. I started wondering in the
Gaelic what was bothering him, and walking to the window saw a thing
that put me to my calculations. The window of his room, you may have
noticed, shows the window of the doocot in between the branches of the
thicket, and a light was there, the first time I have ever seen it. I
watched it six or seven minutes, then the light went out."

“Then after all it was her father!" cried out Æneas, “and he knew that
we were there."

“Not a bit of doubt of it! I can see that now, although I thought when
he came back he had not left the house, because he still had on his
slippers. But there was something in his manner curious; he was a
troubled man who found it hard to keep his mind upon our business. He
asked me just the once again if I had seen you anywhere, and in a key
that showed ye werena in his graces, and all the time was I not thinking
it was just because of the neglected lessons?"

“There's no doubt it was he," said Æneas. “We thought at first it was,
and then I was led astray by thinking he and you had been together all
the time."

“He had plenty of time to reach the doocot and be back," said Ninian.

“But what," said Æneas, “was he lamenting for?"

“I would lament myself if I had any thought a girl of mine was yonder,"
answered Ninian. “It's aye a chancy thing a buzzard in a doocot. The
difference with me is that the neck of ye would likely have been
twisted. He's so keen on Campbell for the girl he wouldna risk that
scandal. But that's all bye wi't; there's this business of the snuffbox;
it's a handy story to give colour to his putting ye away without
entangling the reputation of his daughter, and it's maybe just a pity
that we're on the march together after that bit tale of mine about the
Lowlands road. If this man with me takes the story back to-morrow that
ye met me here, the tune is through the fiddle, and that's the way I
want ye in your bed, or out of sight at least till he is gone."

So Æneas took his supper in the bedded room, and Ninian kept his man
engaged till he too went to bed, and in the morning got him off at break
of day.

“All clear now; we'll have a bite of breakfast, and take our feet to it
ourselves," he said to Æneas, who had not slept a wink.

“First of all I have to send my horse back," mentioned Æneas, and the
other started.

“No other horse goes back from here!" he said with firmness. “The man ye
would send back wi't couldna hold his tongue. No, no, ye'll have to sell
it. Some of these men there for the Tryst at Crieff will buy it from
ye."

To this was Æneas willing, since he had his uncle's consent to do what
he thought best with the horse, and Ninian soon found among the drovers
one who had a fancy for a bargain. They went together to the stable, and
no sooner had the Messenger beheld the pony, dapple-grey, that carried
Æneas from Inveraray, than he gave a cry.

“My grief! we're done for't now!" says he, and backed out of the stable,
Æneas behind him.

“What's the use of me telling lies if ye go and bring a horse like that
with ye?" he asked, dejected. “Ye might as well go round the country
with a drum, to call attention. That speckled one is known to everybody
in the seven parishes, and my man's off to Inveraray with the story that
it's here. He couldna well mistake it, and in the stall next to his own!
I thought there was something droll about his manner when we parted."

For a while this new misfortune dauntened Ninian, but he was not a man
to nurse despair: they sold the horse, between them, for a sum of
fifteen pounds shaken out of as many sporrans. They humped their pokes
in which they put some cakes and cheese; Æneas cut for himself a hazel
stick, to be upsides with Ninian who bore a curious thick rattan, and it
seemed as if the world would fly below them till the dusk as they took
up the water-side.

It was a mountain step that Ninian had—spanged out and supple, and the
burgess of him left behind. He sniffed the air of gale and heather with
applause, and searched the mounts before them and their corries with the
eyes of birds that have come far from wandering and know their home. Now
would he run upon a hillock with droll sounds of pleasure like a whinny,
now leap the boulders and stretch flat among the thyme and thrift to
peer into the dark, small pools of stream. “Ah, now," thought Æneas, “I
have here with me but a child," and yet it was, himself, a boy he felt,
so bland and pleasant was the morning and his heart so strong, so sweet
the thinking of the North before him, and the things that might befall.
So he, too, stretched brave legs, and in the great wide moorland hollow
of the upper Orchy looked ardently upon the massing clouds that floated
silverly about the confines of the world.

They had walked but half an hour when Ninian all at once stopped short,
and staring at a pool saw salmon leaping.

“Mo chreach!" said he, “Look yonder!" and began to fidget with his
stick. “I was just thinking what two daft fellows we are to be taking
the world for our pillow like this, as the saying goes, without first
making up our minds together what's to be the tack we'll steer on." And
aye the corner of his eye was on the leaping fish.

“The nearest way is the best as far as I am concerned," said Æneas.

“I would never take the nearest way anywhere," said Ninian. “Half the
sport of life is starting and the other half is getting on the way, and
everything is finished when it's done," and he almost jumped as another
fellow in the water splashed. “Put we down our packs just here and be
considering cautiously what airts we are to follow, for, thank God,
there's many ways before us, every one as splendid as the other, like
MacVurich's songs. To save the time when we're considering, I'll try a
cast," and in a second he had whipped the ferrule off his sturdy cane
and out of it there came three parts, at sight of which the other smiled
to have Miss Janet's reading of her father proved so soon.

Off went the poke from Ninian's back, and out of it he fetched some
tackle ready busked with flies. He put the rod together, trembling with
excitation, keeping up the while a constant chatter on their plans as if
no other thing engaged his mind, and still and on his eye was aye upon
the bonny fish.

“What we'll do, lad," he said, “is to put the night bye in a
change-house yonder close on Buachaille Etive. It's only fourteen miles
or thereabouts, but it's the only one between us and the Spean, and that
is twice as far again. For a gentleman on my business there's many a bit
of information to be picked up on a night in that inn beside the Moor of
Rannoch. It's close enough on Glen Coe to learn what's stirring there
among MacIan's folk I darena venture in among; forbye there's lochs
beside it on the moor that's full of fish."

“If it's fish we're out for it is not soon we will be at Inverness,"
said Æneas ruefully, sitting down upon his pack and looking at the other
stepping out already on the stones.

“Men and love! look at yon fellow!" cried Ninian in Gaelic over his
shoulder. “God's splendour! is he not the heavy gentleman! And me with
this bit trifle of a stick not better than a wand." All his wind seemed
fighting in his breast; his very voice was changed with agitation. But
still he kept up for a moment longer the pretence of interest in their
route, and cried back to the lad upon the bank, “Up Loch Laggan-side or
through Glen Roy. . . . Oh, Mary! is not that the red one!"

For half an hour was not another word from him; he was a man bewitched,
that crawled among the rushes of the bank and crouched in shadows of the
boulders, and threw the lures across the linn among the playing fish,
with eyes that seemed to grudge each moment that they were not on the
water.

Æneas lay back and crushed the mint and thyme that gave the day a scent
for ever after in his memory: fishing had never been a sport of his, and
he but wondered at his comrade's patience. For long it looked as if the
fisher worked in vain; great fishes surged and leaped about his
hair-lines and his feathers, but they never touched them.

“Aren't they the frightened dirt!" cried Ninian at last. “Not a bit of
gallant spirit in them! And me so honest, striving wi' them! Stop you,
though!" and he fixed another lure.

And Æneas, lying in his hollow, fell asleep. When he awoke the sun was
straight above them, and his friend was still bent on the water-edge and
whipping in the eddies where the fish still lay. An ear of Æneas was on
the ground; he rather felt than heard a horseman galloping upon the
track a little way above the river. Such furious haste was in the
rider's manner that Æneas walked up the brae to watch him, and hailed
him as he galloped past.

He got no answer. The horseman never even raised a hand, but swept upon
his way as if some fiend were after him—a boorish fellow with a head
like a two-boll bag of meal and a plaid upon him.

“We are in the land of poor manners, surely," thought Æneas, and went
down again beside his friend, and just as he got to him, saw him give a
twitch. Ninian, crouched knee-deep now in the water, turned as he came
nigh him with an aspect that astonished Æneas. All his face was puckered
up with exaltation; in his eyes a curious glitter, proud and savage.

“Tha e agam, a bhruide!—I have him, the brute!" he screamed, and
slowly backed out of the stream with his rod-point bent. Æneas watched
him, fascinated, play the fish. It threw itself into the air, and fell
with great commotion in the middle of the pool, and then the line went
whirling out of the wooden pirn the whole length of the pool, which
ended in a shallow narrow channel. Ninian, with his teeth clenched and
his lips drawn back from them, all in a kind of a glorious agony,
strained lightly on the rod and span the reel at every yard he gained
upon his quarry. Repeatedly it burst away again and leaped until the
pool was boiling with its fury.

“If I had only just a decent stick instead of this child's playock!"
said the angler in anguish. “I never had it in my mind to touch such big
ones!"

He fought with it for near an hour; at last he had it close upon the
bank; they saw it rolling at their feet blue-backed, and Æneas stretched
a hand to grasp the line and lift it.

“Put a finger upon a hair of that and there is not a timber of your body
but I'll break!" roared Ninian. “I will take him to this stone and you
must tail him. Catch him by the small and grip as if it were the very
bars of heaven and you by God rejected!"

Æneas gripped. The fish moved mightily within his hand, writhed with
extraordinary power, and breaking slimy from his grasp, snapped Ninian's
line. It slowly turned a moment, and Ninian with a yell dropped rod,
plucked out the knife below his elbow, threw himself upon the fish, and
stabbed it through the gills.

“Sin thu!" he roared, and heaved it high upon the bank. “Oh, Æneas!"
he cried with brimming eyes, and, all dripping, put his arms about his
friend and squeezed him to his breast. He skipped then, like a child,
about the fish, and fondled it like one that loved it, saying the most
beautiful things in death were a child, a salmon, and a woodcock. Then
broke he into a curious Gaelic brag about his prey,—he spoke of it as
if it were leviathan.

“It is not so very big a fish as all that!" said Æneas, and at that the
other looked again upon his prize, and his jaw fell.

“By the Books and you're right!" said he with some vexation. “It's just
a middling one, and red at that! And that is mighty droll, for I was
sure this moment that he was a monster, and the side of him like a
silver ship. But I think you'll must agree I played him pretty! Look you
at this stick, that's only meant for catching trouts! But now we must be
stretching. You were sleeping yonder like a headstone and I hadna the
heart to waken you."

With two slashes of the small black knife he ripped the ends from off
the salmon, and he shoved its middle, wrapped with ferns, into his
knapsack.

“Whatever comes of it we have our dinner," he exclaimed.

“That was a surly dog who passed," said Æneas, as they turned to leave
the river.

“Where? When?" cried Ninian, surprised; so keen had he been on the fish
he had not heard nor seen the horseman.

“That's gey droll!" he said, when Æneas told him what had happened. “A
gentleman might pass like that without the word of day to you but not a
common man in all Argyll; there's something curious in it—something
curious! He wasna, was he, like a man in drink?"

“I think not," answered Æneas.

“There's two or three things only sends a man at gallop through
Breadalbane when he's sober—the ailment of bairns in women and the need
for knee-wives; a bit of mischief in the rear to run away from, or a
scheme ahead."

“He might be just a man who went with letters," said Æneas.

“Letters don't go at the gallop through this country yet," said Ninian,
“whatever they may do when the Road is finished. They crawl. But
still-and-on there's something in the notion; it might well be that the
man had letters. And I don't like letters. They make trouble. They're
sly and underhand. They may be going past ye in broad daylight and you
not know. I never write a letter myself if I can help it; it's putting
words in jail, and it's not the man alone who puts them in can get them
out again; too many have the keys. I wish I had seen the fellow; there
would certainly be something in him that you did not notice that would
mean a lot to me."

It seemed to Æneas that this was making far too much of what was, after
all, a commonplace affair, but he was soon to find that everything that
happened, night or day, set up this curious kind of speculation in his
friend.




CHAPTER VII.

THE INN AT BUACHAILLE ETIVE.


Ninian's notion was to save some miles of walking round Loch Tulla by a
kind of ferry which he knew could always be procured across it at the
middle, where there was a boatman's hut upon the other side that could
be signalled. This ferry, hitherto upon his missions through
Breadalbane, never failed him, and when they reached the loch and stood
below its fir-trees they could see the hut was reeking and the boat was
on the shore. The day was warm, and they were not in haste; they sat
upon a knoll of berries, ate with them their bread and cheese, and only
now and then would shout and whistle to the other side. The wind had
fallen and the loch was like a glass, with every tree and every blade of
grass reflected. Red deer were moving on the shoulders of the lower
hills, which Ninian thought a thing portending change of weather, though
the heavens looked as if they never more would frown—so blue, so clear,
with only rolling clouds like drifts of snow upon the edges. The corries
of the mountains sent a sound of running waters; the red-pine tops, as
old as Scotland, bent above them, hushed and dark; the air was heavy
with the tang of myrtle and of heath. From where they sat there was no
sign of human life in all the country they could see, except the smoking
house upon the other shore, and the man who once came out of it upon
their whistling and went in again.

“No doubt it's very pleasant this," said Ninian, “but the boat is what
I'm wanting, and I never saw a boat more dour. I'm sure he saw us!"

They fired a pistol; waited twenty minutes longer; then they made a
smoke with withered bracken and some greenwood twigs. The reek rose like
a pillar in the air, and more than once they saw the ferryman come out
and look at it, but still he never made a move to come across for them.

“Now isn't that the caird!" cried Ninian, amazed. “Just laziness! Pure
laziness! Even for the money he will not take oars for't! There is
nothing for it but for us to go about the end of the loch, and that's a
great vexation, for there's a river there I never had a line on, and I
didna want to venture near it,—it's a great temptation."

“You can shut your eyes when you're passing it," said Æneas, jocular, as
they took their packs again.

“And what would my ears be for but hearing her go gluck-gluck?" said
Ninian.

It took them nigh an hour to walk around the loch and reach the
neighbourhood of the reluctant ferry. Although it lay far below their
track along the shoulder of the hills, so furious was Ninian that he
must go down and storm upon its tenant—a fellow with a sullen eye, a
falling lip, and little conversation.

“I heard you, and I saw your smoke," he admitted, “but my boat is like a
sieve; she had been staved since I took over peats a month ago, and put
her on a craig in stormy weather."

Ninian without a word walked down to where the boat was lying, and came
back more furious than ever, for it was as hale as Haco's galley.

The man scratched his head at this discovery of his lies, and then at
last informed them he had acted on commands. He had been told he was to
give no help to two long-coated men who would reach the loch that
afternoon and likely want the ferry. But more than that he would not
say. The source of his instructions he would not reveal. “All I know,"
he said, “is that the coats of the both of ye are long."

“It was the man who passed upon a horse some hours ago gave you your
orders, I'm aware," said Ninian at last, and though the man denied it,
it was plainly true.

“I don't like the look of things one bit," was Ninian's confession when
they left the fellow. “There's something in the air. I don't like yon
one galloping past without one word in his head for you, nor I don't
like this brose-brained, sulky fellow and his story of commands.
'Long-tailed coats,' quo' he. In faith they have the measure of us! in a
place like this our coats fair cry out 'Inveraray'! But I must have a
skirt to hide my hilt; a claymore swinging plainly at my hurdies would
look ridiculous in a Messenger-at-Arms, and still I darena march without
Grey Colin."

He hung, uncertain, on the track they had reached again, and looked
ahead upon it with suspicion and distaste. At last he fairly turned upon
his heel, and said the horseman's way was not the way for them.

“There's miles and miles of it," said he, “upon the edge of Rannoch
Moor, the bleakest place in Albyn, if it wasna for the fishing, and we
couldna move a yard but what the world would see us. There's not the
shelter of a berry bush upon it."

“What are ye frightened for?" asked Æneas.

“I'm a man that never yet was frightened," Ninian cried stoutly, “but I
have my calling to consider. If I'm to be of any use at all on this
affair I'm out on I must not be too kenspeckle in my movements. Forbye,
I'm not at ease at all about your horseman, and I'm wishing that you had
not all that money on you. There is not a corrie opening on the moor
that might not have a band of ruffians in it, though I say't who
shouldna, since the country is, or was, my own—Macgregors, and it's
just a bit too soon for me to start disputing: that's a thing perhaps
I'll have to do in earnest nearer Corryarrick. Now I'm thinking this is
not the way we will go at all; we'll make, instead, up Shiraside and
past Loch Dochard through a pass that's yonder namely for its goats, and
down upon Glen Etive. About the dark we should be close on Buachaille
Etive and the inn I mentioned. Whether we stop there for the night or
slumber in the heather like our fathers, who were men, will be a thing
to settle when we see what like the place is. Didst ever lie on heather,
lad? and waken in the mist of morning with the plover whistling?"

“I would not mind a bit," said Æneas, quite hearty, and the other
smiled.

“I'm all for beds myself," said he. “That's age and wisdom. I've lain
too often on the hill and a devil of a root below my middle, but it may
be that we'll have to couch among the deer this night. Anyway, it is a
crooked road we're going—crooked as the fool's furrow and he at
ploughing. Let us be going, merry, light, and tuneful."

And so it was with them; they turned and went gay-hearted to the west
for miles beside a stream which Ninian all the way looked at with
longing, whistling to himself as if to keep his feet from lagging. It
was an old drove track from Appin; something like a score of low black
houses belching peat-smoke from their doors were in a swampy plain on
which high peaks that Ninian had a name for frowned. They skirted past a
mile-long loch where seagulls screamed and ravens croaked among some
stunted thickets of the rowan; then left the water-side, and going
north, went up a corrie where a stream came pouring down as white as
milk. High parts they reached, and at the highest, where it seemed a
world of barren mounts, the weather changed. Black clouds came from the
west, and thunder rumbled on a peak that Ninian called Stob Gabhar.
Before the rain came down upon them they could see into Glen Etive,
lying green below them; they could hear its stream.

And then it was, as they were on the summit of the pass and looking
down, they saw a strange appearance. It was a human figure, naked to the
skin, and running hard across a hollow of the glen.

“The devil's in it if that is not a fellow stark!" cried Ninian,
astonished.

They watched him for a little, but the thunder broke upon them, and the
rain came on so thick it drew a veil across the prospect. It looked as
if they occupied the very nesting-place of storms; each peak and corrie
cried; the lightning stabbed; the slopes they stood on seemed to shiver.

Drenched now in every stitch of them, they dropped down hurriedly upon
Glen Etive, and were hardly at the level when the sun came out again and
every pebble glinted. When they had reached about the place where they
had seen the naked figure, there was sitting eating bread composedly
beside a well, a man in dark-blue flannel clothing even to the kilt. A
great flat bonnet with a tuft of heather on it cocked upon his head; he
tugged it down upon his brow at sight of Ninian and Æneas coming down
the hill.

“You're sitting, good man, behind the wind and before the sun and
beaking of yourself," said Ninian to him gaily, and looked round about,
and there was neither house nor ember, tree nor bush for shelter to a
wren. “What now are you, if a body dare to ask?"

“I am," said the man with the bonnet, as he fidged himself, “a hunter of
wandering game, and it but scanty in this quarter."

“That's what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian blithely. “Are you
going west?"

Long the fellow thought upon this question, and said at last his way was
through the Lairig Eilde.

“And where do you come from?" said Ninian. “We, ourselves, are from the
Bridge of Orchy."

“I came from a good bit off," the other said, with eyes upon the hills,
and very short and dry.

They sat a while together on a stone beside the well and talked of
hunting and of marriage, till the man said he would have to go, and up
he got upon his feet and took his leave.

“Good journeying to you!" said Ninian, and clapped him friendly on the
back. They sat beside the well a little longer, and watched him cross
the glen and pass into a hollow on the other side. They lost him for a
while, and then they saw him running like a deer upon a knoll.

“He's in a hurry, yon one!" Æneas said; and Ninian, who had all the time
been pondering, began to put some questions to him. Had he noticed that
the man was of Clan Tyre, judging by his garters and his heather badge?
That he had no gun with him and could not therefore be a-hunting? That
he was curious about the route they meant to follow and reserved about
his own? None of these things had struck Æneas, and Ninian began to mock
him.

“That's the worst of schooling," he declared; “it spoils the eyesight.
Pity on ye if ye were by yourself and me not thinking for ye! Your
blindness would make a stirk laugh!—oh no! ye need not bristle at me,
little hero; the scolding of friends and the peace of enemies are two
things not to be regarded. But ye never said a word about the naked
man?"

“No," said Æneas, “I left that to you, and I thought you had your reason
for not mentioning it."

“Good!" cried Ninian; “I'm pleased to find ye had that much in ye! Did
ye notice anything more than I have mentioned in this curious hunter
that goes hunting without a gun? The clothes that he has on him are as
dry's a peat, and look at us, all dripping!"

“Impossible!" cried Æneas. “There's not a place in sight where he could
shelter, and the ground is soaked."

“That's just the bit!" said Ninian. “There's not a place here he could
put his head below, and still he's dry's a whistle. I clapped him on the
back to make it certain. That's the very gentleman we saw a while ago
when we were on the hill and he the way his mother saw him first."

He got up from the stone he sat on and went searching round about the
hollow, and came at last upon a boulder with a hole below it where a man
might pack his clothes.

“There," said he, “is where our friend made certain of his dryness," and
he plucked out from the hole a bunch of shelisters with which the naked
man had closed his curious wardrobe.

“It's a strange way to keep dry," said Æneas.

“Indeed and it would not do every place," said Ninian. “There are only
two things in the world a man would take the trouble for in Gaeldom, and
one of them is going to see a lass. But that man from Glen Strae—for
now I ken the cut of him and whence he came—is on the hunt for neither
deer nor maiden."

“You are very sure of it!" said Æneas.

“He is a married man: you'll mind I asked him. The other reason that a
man would have for stripping to keep dry ye would not think of for a
month, for all your Latin, and still it's almost just the same as going
to court a lass. It's self-respect. No man could carry himself
courageously before a girl or an important gentleman if he was
seeping-wet the way we are ourselves, and yon one skipping over to Glen
Coe is after business where he wants to look his best. I'm doubting,
Æneas, they're on my track already."

Æneas now could think of half a score of other things that might account
for the uncivil horseman and the disappointment of the ferry, but a
likelier explanation of the MacIntyre's stripping than the one now given
him by Ninian fairly beat him. And Ninian backed it up with many
arguments. It was not altogether vanity which made him think himself
conspicuous in Breadalbane, nor the cause of some anxiety to lawless
folk upon its borders. As beachdair for Argyll he had many times made
visitations to the neighbourhood they now were in, and always followed
up by some vexatious check or levy from the law at Inveraray. It might
be that the object of his going to the North was guessed, and they were
drawing close upon some glens where troubles often hatched: he had his
own suspicions that the Camerons and Macdonalds had a hand in these
assaults upon the Road.

“You and your money," said he, “would maybe be much better trudging
through the country by yourselves without my reputation tacked to them,
but now we've started we will have to stick together. One thing's plain
in all these gentry turning up in such a desperate hurry to get on
before us, and that is that the best way for us is aye the back way, and
the moon our lamp."

It was a lonely valley that they went through for another hour or two;
at dusk they stood below the Herdsman of the Etive and in the only
dwelling on the river-side they heard a woman singing.

“That's the change-house," Ninian said, “and there's meat and music in
it, as the fox said when he ate the bagpipes."

The tavern crouched, low-eaved and black, beside a pack-horse bridge on
Rannoch edge, and not another light except its own in all the evening.
When they went in, they found its only tenant seemed to be the sweetest,
jaunty, russet girl at baking, singing at “Crodh Chailein" with a voice
to put the birds to trees.

“You are far too merry on it; you should marry," said Ninian to her,
throwing down his poke.

“God of Grace!" she cried, “are you Macgregor Campbell?"

Ninian ducked his head as if a shot were passing over him.

“It has been so suspected sometimes," he made answer. “But the name,
brave girl, is not for shouting in a change. What's of me that was once
Macgregor now is in the mist and best forgotten. Ask them in Balwhidder!
I did not think that you would ken me. You are John Maclaren's daughter,
peace be with him!"

“Yes," she said, “I am John Maclaren's daughter, and you and I will not
fall out together in a hurry, for my father liked you well. I saw you
last time when I was a lump of a girl, and it was at a wedding in Glen
Lyon. Weren't we merry yonder, ochanie! And you are the last man I would
like to see in these parts with your friend—this comely fellow—for
there's people looking for you."

“I said it!" cried Ninian.

“This very afternoon, a man called Niall Roy from Succoth passed here on
a horse and stopped for meat. Some men from Kinlochrannoch were about,
and he got to the talking with them. His talk was all about two
gentlemen, and one of them yourself by name. They went away together on
the moor, the horse between them, and I did not like their friendship,
not one bit! I knew that they were studying something. And I said to my
mother, who is now gone to her bed, 'It will be well for Ninian Campbell
to be not about when Niall Roy of Succoth and these men are on the
moor.'"

“Niall Roy!" said Ninian. “Now that is droll! I never did the man an
injury. What way did he set out, a ghalaid!"

“They went," she said, “along the Cruach on the track that is on the
hillside yonder."

“Fair wind to them on that line then!" said Ninian contentedly, and put
his bit of salmon out for her. He then went out of doors and looked
about the house and smelt the evening wind and listened.

The girl began to lay a table, with a smiling face, for Æneas. “What
will you have for supper?" she inquired, and her voice, he thought, was
sweeter than the thrush.

“I am starving," he told her. “Not a bite to speak of since the morning
at the Bridge of Orchy. There is fish for broiling, but I want some
meat. If you will give to me a steak so thick,"—he showed the thickness
on a finger,—“not too fat nor yet too lean, well beat and tender; not
cooked too sore and yet not lukewarm at the middle; well spiced and
salted——"

She burst out laughing. “O my young heart and it broken!" cried she.
“It's not food you want at all but feasting. If there was a miraculous
steak like that to be had in all Breadalbane you would not get it, for I
would eat it myself."

“Treasure of all women of the world," said Æneas, “I will take whatever
you will give me and eat it with a relish if you will only look at me
while I am at it," and he warmed himself before a fire of peats on which
she had the girdle swung for baking.

“Now are you not the bold one!" said the girl, her teeth like new-born
lambs, her eyes all dancing wickedly. “Your mother must have been a
pretty woman. Will you kiss me?" But she ran away and woke her mother as
she said it.

They fed like soldiers, cracking blithely with the women, and at the end
of eating and of talk, “I want to lay my head," said Ninian, “where I'll
find it in the morning; where will we be sleeping?"

They took them to the best room of the house, and Æneas heard a door-bar
run in channels of the masonry, a murmuring from Ninian in a bed across
the room, the scream of birds upon the moor, and that was all.

His head was hardly on the pillow when he was asleep.




CHAPTER VIII.

COL-OF-THE-TRICKS.


What had one time looked a night of whiter, and the dark clouds surly,
took a change about the threshold of the morning, and the moon came out
and stared. The mountains seemed to lift, the glens to deepen;
everywhere were shadows dark as ink, inhabited by creatures drowsy or
alert—the creeping ones, the squeaking ones, the swooping ones, and in
the grassy nooks the big red stags at stamping, roaring on their queens.
Glen Coe was loud with running waters falling down the gashes of the
bens, the curlew whistling and the echoes of MacTala, son of earth, who
taunts. From out its lower end among the clachans and the trees there
came a company of men behind a fellow on a horse, all belted, bearing
weapons, walking one behind another.

Their track was by a little lochan where the sedges hissed, and one wild
swan took wing for it and flew across the water. They climbed the steep,
steel jingling, so high the voices of the glen they left behind were
muffled to them, and they heard, instead, the fresh commotion of the
spilling burns of Buachaille Etive. About them here were fragments of
the mountain roots high-piled, great rocks that seemed to clang as they
went through the gorges of them; chambers of the fox, and chanters of
the wind.

A little while upon the saddle of the glen they rested, gathered round
the man upon the horse. It was about the hour of two.

No word was said among them louder than a whisper; it might seem the
night commanded reverence, but one who stood a bit apart came suddenly
among them with the story that between the rocks he heard a sound of
cracking nuts.

“Nuts!" jeering said the man upon the horse. “Thou art the champion for
hearing! Nuts will not be ripe till Hallowmas!"

“It was most desperate like nuts, then, Barisdale," said the other
earnestly. “Every now and then they will be cracking, if you come and
listen."

They gathered, some of them, about the riven boulder where he led them,
and no sound of cracking nuts was there but only squeaking from some
beast that tenanted the cranny.

“Oh, Calum!" said his comrades, mocking him, “green nuts in the
foumart's lair! Put down your hand for him, brave fellow!"

“Air t-adhart!—feet for it, lads!" cried Barisdale, “our cracking of
nuts is still before us," and they took up again their tramping. The
wind was now upon their faces very cold. Their captain he was humming
something French, well off to be upon a saddle, for the track was boggy.
Behind them was a night-hag hooting in a place without a single tree; it
was, they said, a sign of dirty weather.

*        *        *        *        *

Æneas heard the owl too, later on; it mingled in a dream he had of
dancing with the russet girl upon a doocot floor, and sometimes would
the eyebrows of her meet, deep-black, and sometimes she was Ninian
Campbell's daughter gutting fish. The fish fell from her hands and
clashed as one would shut a door, and he sat up in bed and heard again
the bar run into channels of the walls.

“Waken, lad!" said Ninian, entering, with his breath short-panting.
“Here's a Watch upon us, and it's not the hour for sleep."

“Were ye out?" asked Æneas, jumping to the floor, astonished.

“I have been but little in," said Ninian hastily, “and you there like a
winter badger. I knew it in my flesh that something threatened from Glen
Coe, and out I went whenever you were sleeping, and went in between the
jaws of Buachaille Mór and Crulaist. A bonnier night for mischief never
fell, so far as I'm concerned; the moon is shining—— Not a stitch of
that on ye!" he broke in suddenly, as Æneas began to dress. “It's not
the time nor place for breeks nor for the bonny coat of ye: stop you!
and I will get ye something like the business."

He went and beat upon another door to waken up the women, and asked if
they had Highland clothes for two. The need for them, he cried, was
desperate; a Watch was coming from the glen.

“Would a dead man's clothes be any use to you?" cried out the mother.
“Yes," said he, “even if the man himself was in them!"

He came to Æneas with clothes of John Maclaren. “There," said he, and
threw them down. “I kent she had no son to wear them; that's one mercy
in short families. Back to blankets, lad, the pair of us, and never
mudge;" and gathering their proper garments thrust them in below the
bed. Once more he sought the women and communed with them, and back
again to Æneas, and stripped, and into bed with cold Grey Colin
stretched beside him.

“Now," said he, “we're ready for them! Here we are—two honest men from
Lorn on the road for Appin."

“How did you come across them?" Æneas asked, bewildered at it all.

“When you went to your bed," said Ninian, “it was like falling in a hole
for you. You just played 'plop!' and there you were back where mankind
came from, Tir a' chadail—Land of Sleep. Myself, I could not sleep a
wink for listening to the river mourning and the moor-birds, and the
less because I saw, before I put the candle out, a pillow-slip of nuts
there in the corner. Now, I'm a sort of man who cannot go to sleep in
any place where something's to be eaten; I get hungry. So up I got—it
was not at the run, but jumping—and made to get the pillow-slip, when
all at once I took it for an omen that this wasn't meant to be a night
of sleep, and something was to crack. Yon fidging fellow with the
bonnet, slashing for it over to Glen Coe, stuck in my mind, and I would
aye be wondering what it was he wanted there. I put my clothes on, and a
fistful of the nuts into my pocket, and went out without a sound. In the
throat of the glen I heard the hammering of a horse's feet, and I got in
a craggy bit beside the track that smelt deplorably of polecats. Who
came climbing up but half a hundred musket men and one tall fellow
riding!

“'There you are, my night-lads! trim and ready!' I said to myself, and
wondered who the fellow was upon the horse, for not a word was passed
that I could hear between them. Thinks I, 'If I could make some noise to
make them wonder, but scarcely loud enough to make them look, I might
learn something of them,' so I started cracking nuts, and every nut I
cracked was rotten. But they did the business—the man who heard me
first called out the rider's name, and who could you imagine it would be
but Barisdale!"

“Col Macdonnell!" said Æneas: the name was often on his uncle's tongue.

“That same! Col-of-the-tricks—a shifty lad! The last man I would want
to see at this stage of my journey, for he's nothing but a robber. I
thought for a little yonder that they had me, for they came quite close
beside my crevice, listening, but I gave a polecat squeak and they went
off."

He sat up in his bed and in another voice said, “Oh, Æneas! when I was
lying on my belly yonder cracking nuts, and saw the moon glint on their
muskets, I had a feeling that I was a boy and watching for my father's
people. I rose when they were gone, and thinking I was young again I
gave the warning of the cailleach oidhche. There is no need for that
for John Macgregor now; the hooting of the owl will not wake him that's
on the sod of truth now yonder, sound and careless, in the kirkyard of
Balwhidder."

“Are they far behind you?" Æneas asked.

“Not more than twenty minutes: I cut through the rough and got before
them,—there they go, man! there they go!"

The sound of many feet and voices came about the inn, and some one
hailed it. Æneas and Ninian got up and looked out through a port-hole in
the shutter of their window. They could see the Watch already drawn
about the house, the moonlight shining on their weapons, and Barisdale
dismount, walk to the door and hammer on it loudly. He looked enormous,
tall and heavy, all the taller for a wing that jutted at a slant above
his bonnet, all the broader for a plaid rolled round his chest.

“By the Books and he's a burly one!" said Ninian. “I never saw you, Col,
before this night, though well I ken your history."

Few, indeed, above the Highland border did not know the history of
Barisdale. The name of him was in the very mouths of bairns, not
mentioned in the dark, he was their mother's goblin. “Big Col will catch
thee!" would they say, the women, and the little ones with trembling
legs would pelt for home. He roved the mountains, heedless of the
marches, like a hart, and with a tail of thirty men would flash down
through the glens demanding tribute. His den was in a strath of
Knoydart, where he had a wadset from Glengarry who was cousin-germain to
him. A small estate that he had married in the shire of Ross could raise
for him two hundred of his clan, and so he played the chief. No doubt
the man had parts; the bonnet off him, and the target from his back, and
he could be the dulcet gentleman. He had the name of dancing like a
prince at lowland balls, though always with a dozen gillies waiting for
him in the close lest he be dirked; his swords had graved on them
Virgilian tags, and he could roll out bits of French and Latin that were
thought by all except the country ministers exceeding fine.

That was Barisdale abroad—at home he was a kite, and trembling things
went clapping in the heather when he hovered. He was among the earliest
of the chiefs to raise a Watch—a company of men that scoured in name of
honesty and order, from the Monadh Liath to Flanders Moss, a check on
forays and the cattle thefts of unclanned men. “Give me a halter and
I'll soon pick up a horse to fit it," was his boast; he captured many a
creach upon the hoof from rifled townships on the Gaelic border, but
they never were restored to those who owned them. Blackmail he lifted
like a rent on quarter-day, and made five hundred pounds a-year from it,
not counting what some ruffian folk he banded with in Badenoch and
Rannoch picked up at his commands, from such as would or could not pay
his tribute.

The door was opened to him, and Æneas and Ninian heard the widow parley.
He talked her plausibly; he wanted roof and stretching-space for sixty
men, and for himself a bedded room.

“There you are!" said Æneas; “it has nothing to do with us at all, his
coming here;" but Ninian shook his head.

“It's a little too soon to say," he answered. “Col is a pretty deep one,
if all tales be true."

It seemed that half the men at least could get rough bedding in an
outhouse. “Very well," said Barisdale, “the rest will have to make a
shift among the fern."

His company sought round the gable-end among the wooden houses, all but
two or three who hung about the front, and Barisdale was inside now and
talking very calmly to the women. The inn was known to him, it seemed,
in every nook; no other chamber than the best would please his lordship.

“Sly dog!" said Ninian; “that's the way he'll get a sight of us. He kens
we're here! On with the kilts, my hero! and remember that my name's your
own—Macmaster. For you, you're just a kind of gentleman, and we are on
the road from Lorn to Upper Appin. You had best be dour on it, and I
will do the talking."

The voice of Barisdale grew louder; he would have the fire room or none,
if all the honest travellers of Lorn were bedded in it, and their galley
with them.

“Hurry with the kilt, lad!" Ninian said, and stuck his small black knife
against the door that had no snib or lock upon it.

Next moment Barisdale was pounding on it with his claymore head. “That's
my room," he cried, “I had it trysted. Sorry to disturb ye, gentlemen,
but that's the long and short of it—I want my room!"

“My God!" said Ninian in a whisper, “if I had him on the hill I'd make
of him a blackcock. I'd scatter the brains of him. I sore misdoubt I'm
going to be angry, and oh, man! that's a great mistake! . . . At
leisure, honest man! At leisure! At least let us be clad before we open
for what seems a gentleman."

He drew the knife out of the jamb and stuck it in his stocking, opened
up the door, and let in Col.

“Come, come, come, come! What's this of it?" cried Barisdale; then
“prutt, prutt, prutt!" said he, in a bullying kind of trumpet, as he
stepped into the room with his chest swelled out, his sword in one hand
and a candle in the other—a tremendous sword that would perhaps have
given Æneas qualms if he had not seen that the man who bore it was, for
all his bellowing, and devouring eye, as hollow as a drum. All at once
it came upon him that his glamoured notion of the North was just a kind
of poetry in himself; it vexed him to reflect that, after all, the
heroes of the ceilidh tales—the chiefs and caterans—were, like
enough, but men of wind as this one seemed.

And yet it was a martial figure, almost six feet and a half, and brawny
to the ankles, over which a pair of trews were closely fitted. He had a
doublet made of buff that creaked and smelled like saddlery, a
sun-discoloured plaid across his shoulders, pistols in his belt, a
dagger at his hip, and on his back the grandest kind of shield,
brass-studded, with a prong set in its navel. Down he clapped the candle
on the table, and stood straddled on the floor, the feathers of his
bonnet scraping on the ceiling.

If he had thought to find two cringing men in broadcloth in the room, he
could not but be startled to behold a sturdy pair of Gaels in John
Maclaren's garments.

“Did my ears deceive me now, or did I hear ye rap?" said Ninian,
looking, in his kilt, as staunch as Castle Campbell, and a handsome leg
upon him. He had Grey Colin naked in both hands across his body like a
switch, and if the big one straddled he was straddled more.

“That ye did!" said Barisdale, and stuck out his lips to make a snout.
“This room is mine at all times when I'm here on service," and his eye
went roving round it. “I'm Captain Macdonnell of Barisdale."

“And I am John Macmaster of the land of Lorn," said Ninian, sniffing.
“Now we ken each other. It's droll to me ye did not think of bringing in
your horse. Son of the world! but you're the long one! How do ye find
out, now, when your feet are cold? If I was you, Sir Captain, I would
take my bonnet off and not be spoiling feathers on the ceiling."

“Habet!" said Æneas, sitting on his bed and wishing the knees of him
were not so white; he had not worn a kilt since he had gone to college.

Barisdale looked at him, and Æneas stared him back and felt that if this
creature had a thousand swords behind his back he still would be a fool.
But Barisdale maintained his bonnet.

He turned again to Ninian. “What are ye of?" said he.

“The Master," answered Ninian, “the sons of The Master; I thought I gave
ye our name. And now, if I may ask, sir, what want ye in this room?"

“The Captain of a Watch has first command of every public room this side
of Perth," said Barisdale; and stood upon his toes to make himself the
bigger.

He cocked his bonnet more upon the side; and they could hear the women
talking in the lobby. He “prutted" not so coarsely, laid a hand upon his
pistol, swelled his chest, and tried to glower down Ninian.

But Ninian was not to be glowered down. “Man, I see ye!" cried he.
“There's not so little of ye! Out ye go this room, or by the mass I'll
spit ye!"

He beat Grey Colin's point upon the floor; he grew like sleet; a crinkle
went across his face like curdling milk, and Barisdale drew back, put
fingers in his mouth, and whistled.

In from the tavern front came his three sentinels and stood behind his
back, and at the back of them the russet girl, bare-footed. She pushed
her way betwen them, stood upon the cold stone nagging of the floor, and
turned on Barisdale.

“My loss!" says she, “that John Maclaren is not here to the fore, or ye
would not dare, Barisdale, make strife with decent people sleeping in
below his roof. I told ye they were gentlemen! There is a bed for ye
upstairs."

He never let his eye rest on her, and his neck that lay in folds above
the collar of his coat was purple.

“You have no right in this room, sir," said Ninian.

“Whether or not," said he, “I have the might, and Might is good enough
to use till Right is ready," and he added something in the Latin. It was
the Latin, which to Ninian meant nothing, and was like enough a taunt,
that roused him most.

He turned in rage to Æneas. “What is he saying? What is he saying? You
that kens, stand up and see me righted!"

“Oh yes, I ken," said Æneas quietly. “It's pitiful! But maybe that's the
way they speak the Latin up in Knoydart-of-the-goats. The line, most
noble Captain, is so"—and he corrected Barisdale's citation. “With some
pretence at scholarship it would become ye to keep mind of what is due
to manners." He suddenly put up his hand and plucked the bonnet off the
Captain's head and threw it on the floor. “Put your little feet in
that," said he to the russet girl, “and keep them warm."

She did it, smiling on him, almost laughing. “Well done, lad!" cried
Ninian, “Brother of my heart!" and Barisdale was, for the first time,
sorely put about and humbled, for his head was bald!

At once the situation changed. “Pooh! Prutt! prutt!" said he, “we're in
a stew about a trifle!" His speech was now entirely for Æneas, on whom
he looked with something of respect. “I did not think I was disturbing
folk who had the arts. Here in the hills it's seldom that we have the
chance of meeting scholars like myself, and I'm vexed I claimed the
right that lies with every Captain of a Watch."

“You're out of your country altogether," Ninian broke in. “Ye have no
Watch rights that I ken of in Shire Argyll."

“Just that, good man! Just that!" said Barisdale. “It's true, it's not
my quarter this, but I am here at present in connection with a tribe who
are at mischief about Rannoch, and I'm acting for some gentlemen who pay
me cess to watch their interests."

“I'm not under cess myself to you," said Ninian, “so what ye may be here
on's none of my affair, and I'm a sleepy man. Good morning to ye!"

But nothing now could anger Barisdale; the russet girl was gone, he got
his bonnet; sent his men away, and made, himself, to follow, but at the
door he turned and said to Æneas, “Your friend is as cross as a thorn
with me, I see, but he's a gallant fellow!"

“It is well known that I am," said Ninian, putting past Grey Colin.

“The women tell me you are on the road from Lorn to Appin," said the
Captain. “You did not see two men in Lowland dress upon the way?"

“Plenty," broke in Ninian before Æneas could reply. “The country down-by
is fairly hotching with them. The last we saw were two long-coated
fellows fishing near the Bridge of Orchy."

Barisdale's eye lit up. “Just that!" said he. “I'm very keen to meet
them," and all at once there was another kind of kindling in his manner
as he looked at Æneas.

“By any chance," said he, “are you of the Macmasters of Drimdorran?"

“The last there was of them," said Æneas, “was my father," and had no
sooner said it than he saw that Ninian was displeased.

“Put it there!" said Barisdale, and thrust his hand out. “I knew your
father—peace be with him!—and he was a worthy man. Proud am I to see
the son of Paul Macmaster! I met him only once—before he went abroad,
when he was putting up with Lovat."

“He wasn't in the best of company when he was there," said Ninian, and
Barisdale looked at him oddly.

“Indeed," said he, “he is a queer one, Simon, but there's maybe worse.
Whatever o't Drimdorran was a bonny fencer; we had a bout of foils in
Castle Dounie yonder, and he learned me one or two bit points, although
his arm was in a sling."

“I'm thinking that was not Macmaster of Drimdorran, sir," said Ninian.
“There's many of the name."

“Oh yes," said Barisdale, “it was himself, and you, sir, are his living
image," and he shook the hand of Æneas again with warmth, picked up his
candlestick and took his leave of them, as if his call had first and
last been of the friendliest nature.

“The back of seven Saturdays to you!" said Ninian when the door was
shut, and sat down upon a chest, his chin upon his hand, and fell in
cogitation.

“If that," said Æneas, “is what the Road is going to put an end to in
the North, good luck with it. The man is just a bully."

But not a word from Ninian, lost in contemplation.

Æneas began to strip again for bed and thereupon his friend awakened.
“Wait a bit," said he. “We'll maybe need to take the road for't as we
are. Without offence to you, you kind of put your foot in't when ye
owned ye were of Drimdorran; up till then I think that Barisdale was off
the scent of us; the clothes of John Maclaren and the patness of the
widow's tale about the nature of her lodgers did the trick. He couldna
guess, ye see, that we were warned about his coming, and to get us in
the short-clothes must have been a disappointment to him, if, as I'm
inclined to think, he got the cut of us from yon one scudding through
the Lairig Eilde. The fault's my own, perhaps; I should have picked some
other name than yours, but how was I to guess that he had kent your
father?"

“That seemed to make him rather friendly," said Æneas.

“Perhaps, so far as you're concerned," said Ninian, “but I'm afraid it
may have made him dubious of myself; it's just a bit too close on
Inveraray. I'm not so sure but now he kens he has his man. I wonder
who's behind him? He daurna put his hand on me for anything that I ken
of in name of law, but he might hang on to me and make my jaunt up to
the North of little use, and I've a notion that is what he's after. I
think ye'll see now that we're watched."

Again he stuck his chin upon his hand and fell to thinking.

“Tuts, man!" said Æneas, “don't let Barisdale bother ye; we'll surely
manage to get quit of him in some way."

“That's not what bothers me at all," said Ninian, “although it's bad
enough to have my passage hampered this way. I'm thinking about
something else of more concern to you that wasna in my mind an hour ago.
Later on I'll maybe tell ye what it is. And it makes me the more anxious
to get up to Inverness with no delays."

“I know what you mean," said Æneas suddenly. “You're thinking of
Drimdorran's snuffbox, and that they may be after me."

Ninian shrugged his shoulders. “It's not likely," said he, “that I would
put off thinking that till this hour of the morning. Man! I thought of
that whenever ye told me of the man upon the horse. I wouldna put it
past Drimdorran in the key I left him in to put a hue and cry about the
country for ye, but I threshed it out and saw he couldna guess that ye
were coming this way. He's sure to know it now, but he has not had the
time to stir up all Breadalbane since my man went back and told him, as
I'm sure he did, about your dappled horse in Bridge of Orchy."

“It wouldna, think ye, be the money that I have about me?" said Æneas,
with his hand upon his waist where it was hidden.

“I thought of that, man, too! I never travelled with such money in my
life before, and it's a great confusion. I always think I hear it
jingling. If you had been a fool and let some stranger know that you
were travelling so rich I might have thought it risky, but I know it's
not that: it's me they're after. My notion is to start upon the road
again this moment if our friend will let us."

They could hear the Captain walking on the planching of the room above
them; he had given a last look to his company and come in to bed.

But when they looked out through the shutter-hole they found his guards
were on alert.

“It's what I feared," said Ninian. “Whether he knows or not, he's going
to have us watched till daylight. We'll have to wait and see what
happens in the morning."




CHAPTER IX.

BARISDALE'S MART.


If Barisdale had any notion of the Messenger's identity he showed no
indication of it at their common breakfast-board. The swaggering Captain
was put off, and he was now the country gentleman, offering up a Latin
grace before his viands. With Æneas he kept a blithe crack going upon
books and travel, in both of which he had experience; to Ninian at times
he threw a jovial Gaelic story. Their Lowland clothes were securely out
of sight now; the women had disposed of them, and Æneas made no bad
shape in John Maclaren's homespuns once Ninian had whipped his knees
with nettles. Half the Watch at daybreak had gone off in pairs as if to
reconnoitre round the country, but the other moiety remained about the
inn with Barisdale, who gave no sign of an immediate departure. The
morning seemed to take its key from little Etive plashing softly on the
stones.

In all of Æneas's progress up till now, except among the corries, he had
not, for very long at any time, been out of sight of human life or the
things of human labour; the land was wild, but almost everywhere
inhabited. In every glen that he had traversed there were huddled on the
faces of the braes small hamlets thatched, from which gushed out a
stream of bairns as he rode on, or single houses set apart in grassy
bits between the rocks, themselves so green with moss they looked like
fairy knolls, with smoke of fairy fires. Long strips of laboured soil
ran up behind the clachans where were women singing as they wrought at
oat and barley, and higher on the hills would men be herding cattle. It
seemed to him he moved then through a land Sicilian, before the bards
were vocal—wild Sicily of meal and honey, labour songs and unlocked
doors.

But now that he could see whereto the last night's march had brought
him, he was startled at the desolation of the scene. The inn stood on a
desert edge; behind rose up the scowling mountains of Glen Coe, so high
and steep that even heather failed them, and their gullies sent down
streams of stones instead of foam. Eastward, where the inn-front looked,
the moor stretched flat and naked as a Sound; three days' march from end
to end they said were on it—all untracked and desert-melancholy. Its
nearer parts were green with boggy grass, on which the cannoch tuft—the
cotton-sedge—was strewn like flakes of snow; distantly its hue was
sombre—grey like ashes, blackened here and there with holes of peat.
The end of it was lost in mist from which there jutted, like a skerry of
the sea, Schiehallion. God-forgotten, man-forsworn, wild Rannoch, with
the birds above it screaming, was, to Æneas, the oddest thing, the
eeriest in nature, he had ever seen. It charmed and it repelled him. He
thought no wonder that the tribes who dwelt beside it should be wild,
and envious of Lowland meadows. The very sight of it, so bleak and
monstrous, filled even him with feelings of revolt against the snug and
comfortable world.

Half a dozen times before the noon that day he walked up to the brae
from which the moor was widest seen, and looked across it with uneasy
breast, and drank, as one might say, the spirit of that wilderness, so
strange and so forlorn. Once he ventured out a bit upon its surface, and
he found an inland sea had likely once been there, and later, maybe, in
the morn of time, a forest, for its old red fir-roots, like the ribs of
cattle, stuck out from the slime of peat. One spot only—far off to the
east, a silver glimmer plumed with woody little isles that seemed to
float on air—relieved the dun perspective's desolation, and Ninian told
him that it was Loch Ba, and gave it loud applause for fishing.

“I know every creek of that same loch," said he, “and every wee bit
calan on it. It is alive with fish; it is the nursery of Tummel and
Tay,—it is the mother of floods; there is for me no fonder place in
great Breadalbane, and many a day the ghost of me is standing there upon
its shore, remembering, remembering!"

This was hours after it was plain that quitting the inn was not like to
be so easy as coming to it. Ninian had slyly put it to the test, and
blamed himself for one bad error he had made in giving even a fictitious
hint to Barisdale of Appin as their destination. For Barisdale it seemed
was going to Appin too, at least in that direction, and would be
honoured by their company. Then Ninian declared he was not in a hurry to
proceed, especially as the river seemed in ply for fishing after last
night's storm. But Barisdale was in no hurry either; two of his men had
spent the night in scouring through Strathfillan, and returned with
tidings of a creach of cattle on the way from near Tyndrum; he only
had to wait until the afternoon to have the rievers and their booty
plump into his arms.

“That's the chance for us!" said Ninian to Æneas. “When Col is gathering
in his winter mart from those poor lads, whoever they may be, who did
the picking of it, we'll play the foot, my comrade, and go our ways.
And, indeed, I'm just a little curious to see what way his lordship sets
about his business of keeping law and honesty afloat; it's always
something of an education just to see a rogue engaged."

Perhaps if Etive river had not been so close upon the door, the
Messenger-at-Arms might earlier have slipped his tether. He spent the
day fishing up and down the bank on which the inn was perched, and all
the time, as he was well aware, with eyes upon him. Even Æneas could not
take a step across the bridge but some one of the Watch was slouching
after him. Barisdale would seem to have at least his doubts about them,
and was determined not to let them out of sight. But ever he kept a
bland and mannered attitude, and even joined them in a midday dram.

It was a singular situation—to be prisoners, as it were, and yet at
large; to have no proof, indeed, that any obstacle was in the way of
their departure, yet to see, in many things, a confirmation of their
apprehensions. The three men sat together to a dinner of sheep's-head
singed, and might, to any casual visitor upon the inn, have seemed upon
the best of terms with one another, but no one came the way that day
until the sun was filling up Glen Coe with evening fires.

It looked as if the folk on foray might have changed their route and
cheated Col.

Ninian put up his rod at last and held communion with the women in their
kitchen, to which he brought a decent string of fish.

“You're the best man ever put a switch upon that water in my time," said
the goodwife with approval. “My man would aye be saying all the fish
were down below Dalness, and there are you, good man, with plunder!"

“Half the fishing is to keep your hooks well wet," answered Ninian
gaily; “and, indeed, the trout up here are dour and scanty. I was better
on Loch Ba or Loch na Staing, if only my good friend that's outbye there
would trust me on the heather," and he jerked a thumb across his
shoulder.

“You should go away," said the russet girl hurriedly in a whisper. “No
good in staying! I do not know what that one wants, but he is never here
except for mischief. My mother got him in your room when you were out
this morning."

Ninian went to the room at once, and came back to tell the girl that he
and Æneas would leave that night.

“Ye needna mind about the door," said he; “keep it on the bar. I have a
desperate fancy for a bonny little window yonder at the back, that looks
upon the river."

“It's mine," said she.

“I knew it was a darling! Anyhow we must make use of it in case we spoil
his lordship's sleep; the front is watched."

“And the back too," said the girl. “A man is on the bridge. He sat there
all last night and blew his nose."

“I know," said Ninian. “That's the Knoydart way of singing to the girls;
perhaps, like me, he had a fancy for your window. He has been planted
there to watch the back as well as mind the bridge, but I will get him
shifted some way at the time that suits us best. We'll drop from that
bit window down upon the bank and then seek down the river. It wasna
only fish I looked for all this day; I ken that burn now, even in the
dark, a mile down, like a lighted street. If you will not be minding, we
will keep these Gaelic clothes till we come back from—from where we're
going. I have a great respect for breeches; there's pockets in them ye
can put your hands in, out of mischief—different altogether from the
little kilt; but it's long-tailed coats and breeches, seemingly, the
country's looking for, and we'll be less kenspeckle in the homespun. And
now (said he) I'll pay the lawing."

The lassie flushed. “No, no," said she; “you were my father's friend. My
father's friend, even if he had a dead man's head in his oxter, is
welcome to his share of the night and shelter in this house at any
time."

“Very good!" said Ninian, and snapped his sporran. “We'll look upon
ourselves as in your reverence—at least till we come back, and that
will make a pleasant journeying."

Outside there rose, as he was speaking, a commotion; the voice of
Barisdale was heard in loud command above the eager chatter of his men,
who gathered, at a whistle, from the brackens, where all day they seemed
to snatch at sleep like foxes, storing up the night-time's power. They
clustered for a moment round their captain on the road, and in another
moment they were gone. They vanished. On the place a hush fell down.

“Mark fowl!" said Ninian, as Æneas came hurrying in. “There's something
on the road, I'll wager!"

“Lowing cattle," answered Æneas. “They're coming round the turn, and the
lads of Col are squatted in the fern."

“That's the spoil he's waiting for. Now we'll see what way he got such
beef on him." He went and stuck his head out at the door, returned, and
grimaced. “Two men on the bridge," said he, “and Col himself, full fig,
even to the target on his back, is sitting on the dyke. It's what I
thought—we'll have to make the night our friend. Come out and hear the
parley, for the poor lads with the bestial will not can face a company."

The stolen cattle, to the number of a score, attended by a gang of
fifteen rugged fellows, were quite close upon the inn when, from the
ground, the Watch rose round them like a pen. A shot or two was fired;
Col challenged, with his pistols flourished, and went strutting down
beside the leader of the party.

“Good stuff!" said he, with a prod of his pistol barrel in a heifer's
flanks. “Where now, if I may ask, have ye been lifting?"

“Glen Lyon," said the leader, “and it took us all our time; we left two
pretty fellows yonder stretched." He was as black of visage as a whelk,
a gaunt, small-hipped, tight-belted, desperate-looking man of middle
age, without a coat, and like a wolf's for hair the chest of him seen
through his open shirt.

“Who's folk are you?" asked Barisdale, and looked upon the man like
dirt.

“God's own," replied the black one. “Too few of us here to prove it to
you, but we're all well picked. My name's Macgregor," and Ninian, who,
with his friend, stood by to hear the parley, looked on his namesake
with compassion. His own folk he had seen in that same plight on many a
time gone by.

“Stout man!" said he to Æneas, “he did not flinch to give his name! I
wish he had a handful more of people with him; Barisdale will get his
mart, this Michaelmas, too easy."

Too easily indeed; the Watch pushed back Macgregor and his men and drove
the cattle to a little pasture by the river-side. In twenty minutes they
had started filing horns to give the older beasts a look of youth.

“You see," said Ninian, jeering. “Col kens his trade; at heart the man's
a Saxon drover. Not a word about the cattle going back to where they
came from in Glen Lyon; he'll have them on the way to market somewhere
in the morning. Glen Lyon is a place that pays no mail to him, I know,
or he would take my namesake and his lads as prisoners. He's only
anxious now to have them scatter; I wonder where they came from?"

The rievers, spoiled in this way, in their turn, as they had spoiled
Glen Lyon, hung about the inn. To Æneas the whole affair came as another
revelation. Till now, the customs of the North, as he had heard of them,
high-coloured with imagination, had appeared to have a kind of
gallantry, and now the foray—most inspiring of them all, as having in
it something of adventure and the risk of war—was shown as commonplace
and mean. Macgregor and his men, outnumbered, seemed to take the
situation almost meekly. For two days and a night they had not tasted
food, they said, except one hurried meal for which they bled the cattle.
In an onset with the sword, or seen, plaid-wrapped and singly on the
hill, or peeping from the edge of some lone wood, they might have kept
for him the spirit of his boyish fancy, but not as they were now.

Barisdale went down the water-side to see about the trimming of his
booty, and Ninian took the chance to talk apart a little with Macgregor,
who, he found, was on his way for Badenoch when this misfortune came to
him. His men, he said, were scalags—landless folk of Cluny's country,
and Barisdale he soundly cursed for robbing them of what had been a
hard-won spoil.

“Ye're a bonny pair, as the crow said to his feet," cried Ninian. “But,
man! I'm vexed for ye."

“Ye're not with him, then?" said Macgregor, looking first at him and
then at Æneas curiously.

“I never saw the man between the eyes until he burst upon us here this
morning on a search for a MacCailein man on his way from Inveraray."

“I heard of that one down at Bridge of Orchy," said Macgregor, with a
shifty eye. “Some Big One—God knows who—has put the country up against
him, and his name's my own—Macgregor—though he takes the Campbell like
Rob Roy. I'm asking you, as of his race myself, and here in trouble, are
you that very man?"

“You have me!" Ninian answered, and Æneas was astonished at his risking
the confession. “I'm telling it to you because you are Macgregor like
myself, and both of us a bit below the cloud. All the waters in the
world will not wash out our kinship."

“Does Barisdale know ye?" asked the Gregaroch.

“No," said Ninian, still more to Æneas's surprise. “But he is keener to
keep me company than I am keen for his, and I doubt we'll have to flit
for't early in the morning; we are going by Ben Alder. The trouble is to
get a start without the long one knowing, and you're the very man to
help me."

Thereupon he laid before the Gregaroch a plan to stay about the
neighbourhood till five o'clock the following morning. He and Æneas
would then come out and join him and his fellows and go in their convoy
as far as Badenoch, and he slipped a little money in Macgregor's hand.




CHAPTER X.

THE WICKED BOUNDS.


“On foot!" said Ninian in the ear of Æneas, who stared from the bed he
seemed that moment to have entered, and inquired the time.

“One o'clock," said Ninian, throwing on his kilt. “The bridge is clear."

“But we were not to start till five," said Æneas complainingly, and full
of the dregs of sleep. “It was at five we were to join your namesake."

“Never you mind that! I'm done with him, and he can settle with his
master. This is the hour for us, my hero; I have just been ben and
warned the women."

They dressed in haste and darkness, and slung on the sacks without
another word. No light was in the house, by Ninian's orders; even the
women's chamber, opened to them by the russet girl, had not a blink in
it except what came from the moon. A breeze of north-west wind was
blowing through the ready open window; Etive splashed below.

“If luck is with us ye will hear us chapping at the door again before
the badger's moon; I've left my fishing-rod," said Ninian to the girl
whose mother lay in bed.

“Whist!" said she, “the man is sitting at the door; you cannot cross the
bridge or he will see you. Here is a collop, cold, and oatcake, that
will carry you to where there is another meal."

“That's my clever lass!" said Ninian, and put them in his knapsack. “We
need not cross the bridge at all; cur way is by the moor; we're going by
Ben Alder."

“Success go with ye!" said the woman in the bed. “Ye have been welcome,
gentlemen."

Ninian got through the window first and dropped upon the bank.

“Good-night with thee!" said Æneas, and took the maiden's hand. Her hair
was down in massy waves upon her shoulders; he could see the moon swim
in her eyes.

“You are no man of your name," she said to him in English, where she had
advantage of her mother. “My shame! that I should have to offer you my
mouth!"

He gave to her a little squeeze, and kissed her softly; she was warm as
milk.

“Ah!" she said, and shivered, “you will think me wild!" and she drew
back. “But coma leam!—I do not care; look at this barren land about
us and no gentle fellow to be kind! It was because I know you are in
danger, and I'll maybe never see you more!"

He dropped upon the bank and sped with Ninian down the water-side
without a word. The stolen cattle mourned among the grass where they
were strangers; heavy dew was lying; far out on the moor the birds were
still loud-crying; rose from off the banks the smell of mint. The house
was out of sight when Ninian stopped at last and said, “We cross here;
there's a shallow bit with sand, stick close to me," and waded over to
the other side. The water took them to the knees, as cold as salted
sleet.

“Surely, surely this is off our way!" said Æneas when they crossed.

“How's that?" asked Ninian.

“You said, this moment, to the girl, that we were going by the moor and
by Ben Alder; that is to the east," and Ninian stopped and looked at
him, astonished, with the full moon shining.

“My grief!" said he, “you are the simple one! It's me that wonders at
you! Of course I said Ben Alder—the opposite of what I meant. If I was
like yourself, Nathaniel, she would have had the truth from me and I
would say Glen Roy, which is the place we're going to. Am I a fool to
give my plans to women? Friendly folk, I'll not deny, the both of them,
but only what a woman does not know she will not tell. That girl all day
will have her eye upon the moor because ye kissed her and she thinks
ye're somewhere there——"

“Kissed her!" Æneas cried; “what put the notion in your head?"

“If ye didn't ye were daft! Just think of it!—Ye'll maybe never see the
lass again! And I to give her such a moving tale of ye—the homeless
wanderer and the foe behind! How better could I get a young one's favour
for us? Whatever o't, she'll have an eye upon the moor in spite of her,
and that will send his lordship with the feathers on a scent I wish him
joy of. Better there than pelting up behind us."

“You told Macgregor, too——"

“Oh Lord!" cried Ninian, with a sudden stop, and shrugged himself, then
started off again. “Come on! We have to climb the Devil's Staircase, and
it's I, it's plain, have many a thing to think of for the pair of us."

Whatever were his thoughts, he kept them to himself and led the way
across the rushes and the gale, high-stepping, for two miles. Within the
portals of Glen Coe they came upon a track that climbed up steeply to
the right, until the glen, all washed with yellow moonshine, could be
seen far down below. They crushed the garlic in their stepping till the
morning smelled of it; they heard the moor-hen hoarsely croak. Hinds of
the mountain, brave princesses, stood in troops and stared at them; the
proud buck stamped, threw out his breast, and trotted softly to the
mist. It was the Sabbath morn, the beasts were unaffrighted.
“Go-back!-go-back!-go-back!" the cock-grouse cried that led the covey
from their feet.

When dawn came they were on the topmost traverse of the steep, and saw
it pale a mountain Ninian called Ben Bhreac. Below them, they could hear
the waves plash on Lochleven.

“There," said Ninian, and pointed to the north, “is the start of what my
father—peace be with him!—used to call the Wicked Bounds, where every
man you'll meet has got a history, and a dagger in below his
coat—Camerons, Clan Ranald's men, Clan Chattan, and the Frasers—it
stretches to the Firth of Inverness for sixty miles the way a kite would
fly."

The break of day was spreading fast. The mist, like sapple of the sea,
was lying in the gullies of the hills that lifted up their heads above
the night like to a herd of seals. To Æneas it looked a dreadful place,
all heaved together in confusion. The mounts of it were giants.

“In fortune's name!" he cried, “are you acquainted with the tracks of
it? It looks to me as if a man might go astray there till he died of
age!"

“Not him!" said Ninian lightly, shrugging up his poke, and leading down
the mountain-side. “And if he did, what odds?—the whole of us are only
straying through the world at best of it. Be glad of it that we are men,
and not the wild geese of the sky that know not whither. Ye may be sure
that I'll not wander ye! But mind ye'll not get through it easy! If I
were a frightened sheep, and put about too much concerning them that's
after us, I would be making for the fort at Inverlochy where there's
sodgers. But that would poorly serve my turn; no, lad, we'll keep the
way we're on and make for Corryarrick."

The sun was high before they rested by a loch in what to Ninian was
known as Mamore Forest, where the deer were belling in their season.
There was no habitation to the view nor wood at first for kindling, but
they fared like hunters, even to a fire, for Ninian got roots of
candle-fir upon the water's edge, and slit them with his knife, and made
a fire that warmed the widow's collop. Heather-tops he gathered and
white hay, and made a couch for them they lay in sleeping till the
afternoon. When they awoke it was with hunger. Not a thing was there to
eat in Mamore Forest, and they walked for hours until at dark they stood
beside the tumbling water of the Spean, where was one dwelling, stark
alone, that had in it the clack of someone weaving. Ninian went to the
door himself, and Æneas sat waiting for him by the river. The other came
back in a little, hasty, with some barley-bread and a side of kippered
salmon.

“I thought," said he, “of putting past the night here, but we'll have to
spend it better getting on our way. This cursed country—and a plague
on't!—'s roaring with the name of Ninian Campbell!"

“What is it now?" asked Æneas, and Ninian was hurrying them away while
yet they ate their bread and fish.

“I went in there and I found a hag of a woman not joyous to look on,
weaving cloth. 'It's an hour ago,' said she, 'since men were here and
asking for you. Your name is Ninian Campbell.' 'How ken ye that, just
woman?' I inquired, astonished. 'Fine that!' croaked she; 'ye have the
very poke upon the back of ye!' 'What poke?' said I, and she was busy
spreading butter on the bread. 'The poke,' said she, 'ye plundered from
the man ye slew beside Ben Alder. God's pity on ye, stranger, for to
kill a man for that! They're waiting for ye on the road between here and
Fort William.'"

“The thing's beyond belief!" cried Æneas, and Ninian was stretching out,
tip-water, till the sparks flew from his heels. “Who could have set
about so wild a story?"

“Who could set about that story but the devil's son, himself?" cried
Ninian in a fury. “Black death be on the brute! It's Barisdale! I sent
him yonder chasing the cuckoo about Ben Alder side, but he has been too
slippy for me; when he found the birds were not in that direction he
made up his mind, and pretty cleverly, that we were maybe for Fort
William."

“But the story of the murdered man——"

“Any story's good enough for Col to rouse the countryside against us. I
wish to God I knew whose pay he's in in this affair."

“He must be well paid indeed, to leave his creach of stolen cows to
come so hard in chase of us," said Æneas.

“You may be sure the cattle will be well looked after by my friend the
hairy one, who picked them up to start with in Glen Lyon."

“Macgregor?" Æneas said, not understanding.

“No more Macgregor than yourself!" cried Ninian with disgust. “I could
have laughed to end myself to see ye taken in with such a story. I
thought by this time ye could put a thing or two together. Yon was a man
of Col's—his own lieutenant. I ken the way Col lifts his mart now; he
puts on a band of nameless men to do the stealing and comes up behind to
take their plunder in the name of law. A bonny Watch! The devil's but a
boy compared to him! If yon had been a decent band of any worthy name it
would not be so meekly they gave up their prize."

“I was quite misled!" said Æneas, ashamed. “But what did ye engage the
black fellow for with all your story about five o'clock and going by Ben
Alder? And ye told him who ye were: I thought myself, that very queer of
you."

“I told him that," said Ninian, “to get the bridge clear of the fellow
with the nose. When Col heard from my friend his rogue that we were safe
till five o'clock he took away that sentry. Of course my friend went to
his master, straight, and told him what we planned and who we were,—a
thing his lordship knew quite well already."

“You weren't sure of that."

“As sure as that I walked on leather! The woman told me he had looked
our knapsacks, and at first I thought there was no harm in that, but
then I minded something—he would see my father's name upon the Book!
There's noble reading in the Bible for our good, and many a turn I take
at it when I have time, but Col, I'll wager, didna bother much with
that; he found the name of John Macgregor there. But I wasna vexed; my
knowing that he kent me gave me an advantage."

The land by now had donned the mantle of the night and buttoned it with
stars. They sat, two hours, upon a stone when they had walked a mile or
two, and there deliberated upon the situation. Glen Roy, that Ninian had
thought to take through Keppoch's country, was now out of the question;
Barisdale was pack with Keppoch's folk, and could depend on help from
them in any hunt that had a Campbell for its quarry. To stop Glen Roy as
well as scour the country to Fort William was sure to be his policy.
From Corryarrick they were only some twelve miles of distance, but that
meant across the hills, and in the dark it was not to be ventured. They
fixed upon a longer route that followed up the Spean and skirted to the
westward of Loch Laggan. Loch Laggan head was close upon the finished
Road, although it was as far from Corryarrick as they were that moment.
Once upon the Road, though, they were in a climate safer than the hills;
all traffic of the soldiers working at its end went over it, and honest
men were surely free from molestation.

This latter was the argument of Æneas, who felt he could not have his
feet too soon upon a highway.

“I'm not so sure of that," said Ninian, however. “All this trouble since
we left the Orchy is to keep me off the Road, and I've a notion that
there's something special brewing there. You may be sure the Road itself
is watched; we darena venture on't until we join the sodgers."

On Æneas had weariness come with an ache for every limb, and he was all
for sleeping for a while upon the heather, but his friend said no; the
night was made for them; although the moon was not yet up they had the
light and guidance of the stars; it was about the hour of ten; the
Plough was lying upside down upon the hills.

At midnight they were half-way up Loch Laggan-side, from which their
track was sundered by a clump of firs, and Æneas was walking half
asleep, when all at once they came upon a score of houses on a level at
the foot of woody crags, and every one of them was lighted. The smell of
burning peats was strong, and also something like the smell of melting
rosen, but stronger was the smell of roasting meat, and Ninian was the
first to speak of looking for a bed and supper.

The houses with stone-anchored thatch on them were laid in rows, with
dungsteads piled before them and black stacks of peat; a score of dogs
began to bark, and down upon the place the yellow moon of Michaelmas was
glaring. Out the folk came rushing to their doors, and all of them were
women. Not a man was to be seen!

“We've come on a night of ceilidh and the men from home," said Ninian.
“Take the nearest door and in before they gather round."

A woman very dun of visage, and a bunch of children stretched across a
bed, were in the house they stopped at, and by luck, or else by Ninian's
judgment, they had got the very house where meat was cooking on a
brander.

“In the name of the Good Being, what is't?" the woman cried, as Ninian
and his friend stepped in and hailed her stately. She stood upon the
floor in great alarm, and what was she engaged upon but dipping
flambeaux in a pot of rosen?

“Will't give us leave to sit beside the fire till morning?" Ninian
asked. “For we have come a distance; in the dark we cannot make our
way."

She was, as well as dun, a biorach, sharp-nosed woman, plainly mother
of the flock stretched on the bed; the softness of his speech apparently
assured her, but she lifted up a cruse that, hooked upon a cabar, lit
the house, and coming up to him she held it close beside his breast.

“What clan art thou?" she asked, her eyes upon his clothing: it was not
of tartan but a hodden brown.

“What clan," said he, “but of Clan Alpine, children of the mist and
sorrow?" and to her face there came a yearning.

“Sit down," she said, at that. “My mother was Macgregor. Ye will at
least get supper and a warming."

She gave them water, warmed, to bathe their feet, and brandered venison,
and all the time the bairns stretched on the bed keeked from their
bolster at the strangers. Druimbeg, she said to Æneas, was the
township's name, and all the tenants were Macdonalds. About her guests
she never asked a question.

“And where, goodwife, if I might ask, are all the lads?" said Ninian;
and thereupon, in spite of her, she showed confusion, hinting at a small
black pot they were engaged with on the hill. “It will be as well," she
said, “if ye were not about on their returning," and she gave them both
a dram of spirits, rank and reeked beyond description. But as for
stopping for the night below her roof, she plainly made it out
impossible.

“A shed itself would serve," said Æneas. “Any place at all to pass the
night in."

“I know of no place, honest men; my shame to say it, and my melting!"
she exclaimed with agitation.

They gave her thanks, and Æneas, with a joke, slipped in a coin below
the children's bolster; then out he followed Ninian. The door was barred
behind them instantly.

“That looks mighty droll," said Ninian—“barring up a door, and not a
living soul between her and the Sound of Sleat but honest Gaelic
people!"

And then they found that every glimmer in Druimbeg was out and every
door was barred. They rapped at two or three without an answer.




CHAPTER XI.

ÆNEAS-OF-THE-PISTOL.


The noble moon that ripes the corn was skulking in black clouds. A wind
that seemed to sweep from every quarter, seeking harbours, as the saying
goes, was whistling round the peats, and it was grown exceeding cold.
Ninian led the way across the dung of fifty cattle, skirted through the
weeds that bordered some tilled fields, went through a sandy patch
encumbered with thick whins in which they got entangled, making for the
clump of firs that they had noticed earlier, where they counted on a
sleep within its umbrage. Owls were mourning there; it was the
water's-edge of Laggan, and the waves were plashing on its fringe. The
night seemed given up to all the ancient things. Never a word was passed
between them till they reached the planting and got in upon its dust,
and there, as they were standing in the dark, the muttering of the wood
about them, Ninian smelled crumbled lime. “There's more than fir-trees
here!" said he; and pushing farther in, they came with great surprise
upon a building. What its nature was they could not solve; four-square
it stood among the trees, too big for a domestic dwelling, still in
human use, for glass was in its windows, and it had a door, but
something in its spirit, cold and bleak, proclaimed it not a place
acquaint with fires.

Twice they went about it in the darkness that was here intense, but
could make nothing of it; then they found the door of it was only on an
outer bar; Æneas, who came upon it, drew it back and gave them entrance
to what seemed one single big apartment, like a barn, but floored with
flags and smelling rank of grease. He would have struck a light, but
Ninian forbade it, apprehensive that a glint of it might penetrate the
wood and bring upon them some intruder. They stumbled round a while, and
felt at walls unplastered, woodwork like to folded trestles heaped up in
the middle of the floor, some benches, and a crock of tallow. At one end
was what seemed to feeling like a massive table with a great flat stone
upon it.

Æneas, groping for some other clue to what the place was meant for, came
at last upon a heap of hides, and had no sooner found them than he gave
a cry.

“What now?" said Ninian eagerly.

“What do you make of this?" said Æneas, pulling at the skins. “Muskets!
Here they are in scores, and smeared with tallow."

“My God, but we are in the kittle country!" said Ninian, with amazement,
handling the guns that had been hidden in below the hides—in scores, as
Æneas said. “I wouldna miss this night for any money! There's not
supposed to be a gun in Badenoch since the Act was passed disarming
Donald, but here they are in heaps like paling-stobs! I knew it! Fine I
knew it! 'Only a weapon here and there among the thatch,' says Islay,
but he doesna know the devils!"

Æneas was fumbling at the muskets. “Not much use in them," said he, “for
half the cocks of them are broken. By the locks and length of them I
take it they are Dutch."

“Good lad!" said Ninian, with surprise. “You have some observation, I
will give you credit. We'll get on with one another nobly. Dutch they
are, man!—ay, but here's a Spanish fellow; now what in all the world
would they be doing here?"

“You told me there was smuggling of arms yourself," his friend reminded
him; “the thing might mean another Rising."

“Tach!" cried Ninian disdainfully. “Wi' trash like this ye wouldna burn
to boil a pot wi'! Na! na! they're never meant for serious business. But
what's the reason of them being stored so snug and greased? . . . Oh,
man alive! I see it!" and he laughed until the roof was dirling.

But what it was he saw he would not tell; it was, he said, a drollery
that would improve by keeping till they reached a barrack. “And then,"
said he to Æneas, “you'll laugh at the confusion that I'll put them in.
I wish my father was alive this night to see this ploy with me, and what
a lot of clever lads they are in Badenoch!"

They stretched themselves upon the hides; Æneas at least dog-wearied to
the bone, and he was sound asleep when Ninian, twenty minutes later,
jumped upon his feet on hearing somewhere on the confines of the wood
the voice of women. He did not rouse his friend, but went out through
the trees, and from the border of them witnessed what disclosed the
reason for the dun wife's hurry to be quit of them.

Making through the whins that he and Æneas had tangled in, were close on
thirty men well geared for fighting, in the middle of them four who
carried upon spokes what first he took to be a coffin. They passed so
close where he was standing in the timber he could see their very
buttons, for although the moon was still in hiding, they were lit up in
their going through the whins by flambeaux, two or three of which had
been brought out to guide them by their wives. If spoil had been their
object, none of it was with them, save perhaps the box, which Ninian now
perceived was not a coffin but a chest well clamped with brass. A chest
like that, thought he, was never built beside Loch Laggan.

When they had passed, he sought the hides again alongside Æneas, still
asleep, and slept, himself, until above him clanged, tremendously, a
bell!

At first he could not trust his ears; the sound came from the roof,
outside, fantastic, like a belling in a dream, and only for a moment.
Its echo died away upon the hills surrounding. Opening his eyes, he
found white day was at the windows, and Æneas, dumfounded, standing with
a rope held in his hands.

“Mo chreach!" cried Ninian, jumping to his feet, “ye've done it now!"

“We're in a church!" said Æneas, bewildered.

“In faith we are! I might have kent it by the cheeping of your boots
last night; ye sounded dreadful like an elder. And what is more, I ken
the kind of kirk it is—it's one of the sly old chapels of that heather
priest, Big John of Badenoch. And now, my grief! that ye have ca'd the
bell, we're like to have a congregation."

“How was I to guess a bell was at the end of this accursed rope? I saw
it there, and tugged it without thinking. What a chapel!" Æneas looked
round it with disgust.

“Good enough for keeping guns! Ye'll mind we're in among a lot of
heathens, no' right sure yet whether they are Protestant or Papist till
the chief of them comes round to tell them wi' a yellow stick. It's
clear a Mass has not been said in it this Sunday, but now that ye have
clinked I hope ye have your sermon ready. There's not a wakened body in
Drumbeg that's not already putting on his hose for chapel. On the
cheeping boots of ye!—we'll better jump!"

He turned, so saying, for the open air, slinging on his knapsack as he
went, and Æneas soon after him, and through the wood they scurried to
the water-side. They had not run for fifty yards along the shore, secure
of observation from whatever hamlet folk the luckless ringing of the
bell brought out on them, when in a little creek of shingle, very rough,
they came upon a boat upturned with oars below her.

Loch Laggan here was narrow—little more than half a mile across; if
they were on the other side they still were on their way to Corryarrick.
So far as they could see, no other boat was visible than this which they
threw over on her keel. Although a coble only, she was heavy as a barge,
and took them long to launch, and then they found she had no tholpins.

Up the shore and to the wood ran Ninian with his small black knife to
cut him pins, and he was gone some minutes out of sight behind a patch
of hazel when his voice came to his friend.

“Stir ye, Æneas, or Ninian is done for!"

Four men, and two of them with guns, had burst out from the firs, and
now came down upon the Messenger. The leader was a fellow clad in skins,
and had an eye as clear and fiery as a cairngorm stone; his weapon was a
tuagh, or halberd of Lochaber, and he looked like mischief.

“Stad! stad!" he bellowed. “Thou that got my supper, stop and get thy
breakfast!"

Ninian, breast-high in the hazel brushwood, with the tholpins cut, his
knife still in his hand, backed out and cleared Grey Colin. It was then
he gave the cry that summoned Æneas.

They crowded down upon him cautiously as he fell back along a kind of
passage to the shore; close up on either hand of him the thicket
screened his flanks, and so he had them all before him, hampered in the
space so much they could not come at him but singly. He that had the axe
was first to close upon him as he crept back, crouching from the houghs,
Grey Colin glinting, and the knife along his other wrist. A shape more
wicked, wildcat-like and venomous, was never seen at bay in brake or
timber; the very teeth of him were bared; he gave a
shout—“Ardcoille!" ferociously, so loud the wood rang with it; the
cry came to him without thinking from Balwhidder graves: he had not
used, he had not heard, the slogan of Macgregor since he was a boy.

“Here for you, Gregorach!" said the man in skins, and swung his halberd
high above his head.

Ninian, from his crouch, sprang in upon him like a salmon at a fall, and
with the black knife stabbed him under the uplifted arm. “Sin agad!"
said he: “there's for you!" and with his claymore head he smote him on
the forehead. The man fell like an ox and grovelled. “Pick up thy dirt!"
said Ninian to the rest, and turned about and ran.

The three were hard upon him when he reached the cove, and faced them
for the second time with Æneas beside him. “My lad, ye'll not forget
this day, whatever o't!" said Ninian, flourishing his sword, and Æneas
had the small Doune pistol of his uncle ready in his hand. As he was
standing on the shingle there at Ninian's shoulder, he was put about so
much he dared not part his jaws a hair's-breadth lest his teeth should
chatter.

A speckled man in trews, his white face patched with brown spots like
the back of ferns, was first to make at Ninian. He had a sword ground
almost to the thinness of a spit, light as a feather, and he walked on
courains—slippers made of hide with hair outside of them, lashed on
his feet with thongs. Of Ninian he had a head's advantage in the height
and twenty years of youth.

“Black water on ye!" he cried out, and lunged.

Æneas for the first time cocked his pistol.

“No, no!" said Ninian to him quickly, falling back a bit and parrying,
“leave it between us and the swords! Ye better mind the guns." His eyes
were piercing on the speckled man's; he said no word, but like a
strapper grooming horses hissed between his teeth and briskly plied his
sword. He beat upon the other's weapon—ventured once or twice a
thrust—broke ground.

At that the other screamed some taunt, mistaken of the movement, and
came at him with his weapon back to cut. Grey Colin flashed and got him
on the shoulder; he went down upon his knees and fell to crying loudly
on the Virgin Mary, but the spit still in his grasp.

Ninian swithered, looking at him for a moment as he cried and with his
bonnet dabbed upon his neck to stanch the blood, then turned to find a
musket levelled at himself. It never fired. The small Doune pistol gave
a crack; the man who held the musket fell grotesquely like a string of
fish, and Æneas stood unbelieving that the crooking of a finger held
such dreadful chance. He looked about him like a man come from a
swound—at Ninian with his sword advancing on a lad who dashed into the
wood, and at the others stricken. A bird cried out, “Bi glic! Bi glic!
Be wise! be wise!" and flew across the creek.

“Better a good retreat than a bad stand!" said Ninian, panting; “you in
the beak of the boat and me behind, and pull like fury!"

They pushed the boat off, wading to the knees before they had her
floating, boarded her and started rowing wildly. A very bedlam of
distracted folk broke loose was coming through the wood with hunting
cries.

“Can ye make any shape at the swimming?" Ninian asked across his
shoulder as they tugged the oars.

“A bit," said Æneas.

“Good luck to ye! Ye'll maybe need it. Here's this bitch of a boat, and
she's geyzing like a boyne. I doubt she'll not can stay afloat till we
reach the other side."

So keen had Æneas been glowering back in a dreadful fascination at the
crumpled figure of the man he shot, he had not noticed that the coble
leaked; at Ninian's words he realised the water was above his ankles,
and was gushing 'twixt the planks in half a dozen seams.

“We'll manage it!" said he, “I think we'll manage it!" but doubted it
within his soul. The wind was lifting up the waves white crested, the
freeboard of the boat already looked appalling low, she moved but
sluggishly.

At last a score of men broke through the planting, and ran down into the
creek where lay their friends. “Easy all and jouk!" said Ninian quickly.
“Grey lead's flying!"

He and Æneas ducked; some bullets whistled past; again they started
rowing.

Twice again the grey lead flew, but wider of them. “Not a gun in
Badenoch!" quo' Ninian mockingly. “This, if I were spared, would make a
pretty tale for Islay!"

The loch was in the boat and almost to their knees before they reached
the opening of a burn, screened from the other side by sauch-trees
growing on a spit of sand bent round the outlet like a shearing-hook.
Out they jumped before the boat was grounded; Ninian threw the oars out
in the current of the burn and thrust the boat herself out after. About
them, all Loch Laggan-side was clothed in birch and hazel, wind was
humming in the leafage and the boughs were waving; never was a bit of
country bonnier, a morning air more sweet and peaceful.

But from the shore that they had fled from came a sound that filled the
hearers with dismay—the cries of keening women. At that wild corranach
the heart of Æneas filled with horror at his share of what had caused
the lamentation; down he clapped upon a stone among the willows, with
his head bent in his hands.

“Oh, Ninian!" said he, and rocked himself in anguish, “did I kill him?
Did I kill him?"

“Devil the doubt! I knew the way he dropt he was as dead's a herring.
And now ye are a man—full-grown, ye have been blooded. I'm proud of ye,
Macmaster; stand you up!"

He drew Grey Colin with a flourish from the scabbard, and the clotted
blood of him that he had struck was on it: with a Gaelic utterance he
laid it lightly on the young man's head.

The flesh of Æneas grewed; he retched at such an accolade.

“What, man! are ye sick?" asked Ninian.

“Yes!" said he, “I'm sick!" and broke into a furious condemnation of
this wretched country.

“What in Heaven's name did ye expect?" asked Ninian. “Dancing?"

“Everything's destroyed for me!" cried out the lad. “The stories have
been lies, and we have aye been beasts, and cloak it up in poetry."

“We are what God has made us!" said his friend. “And we must make the
best of it. All this belly-ache and bocking over one or two Macdonald
thieves the world were happy rid of! Mo naire on ye, Macmaster! If I
had not your father's Virgin nut upon me, it is you and I would have
been yonder stretched. Stick your head and hands into the burn, and that
will make ye better."

Æneas bathed as he was told, and rose from that lustration somewhat
comforted to find the other with his shagreen case of razors out and
started shaving.

“Were ye frightened yonder?" Æneas asked him.

“Not one bit!" said he.

“It's more than I could say! I was in terror!"

Ninian gave an oath and turned on him. “Let that not out of your mouth,"
he cried with spluttering passion. “A bonny-like thing it would be if we
went bleating every time we were in fear. What better than the beasts ye
speak about were we unless we hid our trembling from each other?"

“Ah yes!" said Æneas, “but you were yonder glowing like a flame; with
you there was no flinching, and with me my very blood was ice."

“Was I?" cried his friend in Gaelic, with his face convulsed. “I was
just yonder like thyself, and every drop of me was frightened for the
death. Not till I took Ninian Campbell's body with my father's hands
could I command the coward. 'Stand fast, thou, craven, there!' I said to
him, 'for there is worse to come!'"

The face of Ninian lightened. “Was that the way of it with you?" he
asked, quite understanding.

“Never ask me yon again if I was frightened! God help us if we were not
better than our bodies' inclinations! Do you know the reason for my
asking you if you could swim? Do you know the way your father died?"

“It would be strange if I did not know that," said Æneas. “He perished
at Glenshiel."

“He did not! Not one bit of him!" said Ninian. “He died, poor man, by
drowning, and he's in the deep. We always give to him the honour of
Glenshiel, a battlefield, but, still-and-on, although he fought, he
never fell there. When his side was scattered he and other two made over
country for Loch Duich where there was a brig in waiting. They launched
a coble, just the way we did ourselves there, and were scarce a
cable-tow from shore when down upon them came the redcoats firing. The
boat was swamped. . . . Near a month was passed before the story came to
Inveraray wi' some straggling men of Glendaruel's. That's what I was
thinking of when you and me were rowing; seldom will a thing be
happening in a family once but it will happen twice, and if you couldna
swim I would have given you the Virgin nut of Barra. Myself, I canna
swim a stroke! . . . And now," said he, and put his razor back into the
wallet, “I'm feeling fine; come on again the gallant pair of us. The
splendid name I'll have for you in Scotland after this is
Æneas-of-the-Pistol!"

And still, when they had walked a mile or two there came upon this
valiant gentleman a mood as gloomy as his friend's. Now that the heat of
war was out of him their skirmish took a different aspect. The people of
Druimbeg, he said to Æneas, would learn, even if they did not know
already, who had brought them such disaster; he dare not set a foot in
Badenoch again, and that was awkward for his business. There even was a
chance of some inquiry by the law—a power he feared the more because he
was its nominal officer, and that at least would bring the fact of Æneas
being in his company before the world, and raise some ugly questions
with Drimdorran.

“The truth of it," he said at last, “is, we have made a perfect bauchle
of the business going near Druimbeg at all and sleeping yonder. What day
is this?—St Michael's. I'll never go to kirk again on Michaelmas."




CHAPTER XII.

CORRYARRICK PASS.


In a nook of the mountains where a loop of Spey and two deep tributary
burns served both to drain and to defend the situation, if defence were
called for, there was pitched the wooden camp of Leggatt's men. It
occupied about an acre of rough moorland grass, bog-myrtle, yarrow herb,
and heather; the huts were laid out in a square upon a gentle slope;
behind them lined some tents with ditches for the rains. A bleaker
prospect than was seen from Leggatt's camp was difficult to fancy; save
that the innumerable streams, loud-bickering down the hillsides to the
valley, took in pools the colour of the sky or glitter of the sun, the
landscape had one universal hue of dull grey-green and purple, wearisome
beyond endurance sometimes to the eye of Wade's subaltern. Not the
colours only, but the dull monotony of shapes, afflicted Leggatt and his
lowland comrades; they were sick for trees, and here not even a middling
bush was visible: months had lapsed since they had seen a mortared house
or garden; every day they rose to work at bugle-call they cursed that
barren tableland on which they were sequestered, prisoned in by gloomy
mountain walls.

Two hundred men were under Leggatt—redcoats mainly from the Great Glen
forts, a squad or two of tradesmen privates picked from the blockhouse
garrisons set here and there about the country, and a score or more of
native soldiers, wearing tartan, from the Highland Companies. Three
years had Leggatt worked upon the Road on this particular section that
started from the gusset at Dalwhinnie; he had the brevet rank of
Captain, and was known among his men as Captain Trim, so keen was his
insistence on exact particulars and neatness in the finish. He never
added on a chain of road to what was made of it already, till, like one
that makes a song, he had gone back upon the parts accomplished, seeking
for fresh heart, and to maintain the key and harmony. Thirty miles
a-day, on horse or foot, he covered of the Road. Red, level, sixteen
feet to twenty wide, and thrown across the country like a string,
ascending lesser hills and sinking into hollows, floated on morasses
over brushwood, or built up on them with timbers and fascines, it seemed
(so far as it was made) to hurry to the North, impatient to be there,
defying nature's quirks to lure it into roving. And yet, of all the men
who built it, few looked on it otherwise than as a road worth going on
but one way—that was to the end that lay far off in Stirling and the
towns. Here, at the foot of Corryarrick Pass, this notion of it only as
a road for home was maybe natural; high up in mist above the camp of
Leggatt it came to a sudden end. Five-and-twenty hundred feet above the
sea it tacked in eighteen sharply-angled steep traverses buttressed up
with walls, and seemed, as Leggatt's humour put it, sorry to have
climbed so high and with such labour just to find it must go down again.

Seven miles were yet to cut and build to Fort Angustus, and Leggatt
hounded on his soldiery as if they had been slaves of Carolina. As yet
the winds of autumn breathed, the floods had not begun, but days were
shortening, and he meant to have the Pass accomplished ere the winter
burst upon the land and took possession till the spring. His soldiers'
sixpence extra pay each day was earned in sweat. The mattock and the
spade were in their hands at daybreak; often through the night they
wrought prodigiously by torchlight or the flare of brushwood fires,
stemming the course of new-born torrents from the hills, strengthening
the bridges, shattering or burying enormous boulders, patching up the
damage done at times by natives, who, since the Road had come across
Dalwhinnie, loathed it like a pest. Leggatt's section was the roadman's
hell; each spring he had deserters to the numbers of a score; the half
of them were Highlanders, the other half he feared were under Highland
influence. In all the three years he had worked upon the Road as man of
Wade's he had not seen a native walk on it a furlong; parallel beside it
there were beaten down already, by the clansmen and the clansmen's
cattle, trails that both preferred as easier for the feet. Often with
amazement would he watch men plunging to the knees at icy fords below
the very shadow of the bridges they looked on askance as meant for
Sassenachs and women. But even their women waded.

Doubtless what affected them in some degree was a foreboding of the part
the Road would play in times of trouble with the Gall. They saw it used
continually, so far as it was finished, by the redcoats and the Watches;
standing, wrapped, themselves, in plaids, on thicket verges or the
slopes of hills in mist, like figures of some other clime and age, they
watched, with gloomy brows, dragoons pass cantering, four abreast, or
companies of footmen out of Ruthven Castle. Sometimes on it could be
heard the roll of drums; up Blair of Athole once had come a house on
wheels, glass-windowed, horses dragging it, a gentleman within it
smoking, and a bigger gentleman they touched their caps to, driving.
Never a day went past but someone could be seen upon the street (as
Gaelic had it); here, in Badenoch, the world seemed coming to an end.

The night that followed Michaelmas was drawing in with something of a
threat of rain in it. Low on the hills all day had mist gone trailing;
westward were there black clouds gathering, and the wind was gone. In
Leggatt's camp prevailed a Sabbath hush; upon the making Road the pick
and spade lay idle; out of doors no living creature moved. It looked a
place surrendered back to nature, man-abandoned. Since noon all work had
been suspended, and the men were in their huts asleep; all night before
they had been searching through the hills for robbers.

And now, as fell the night, came Leggatt—bearded like a Frenchman, with
a coat bemired, and red soil to the knees, upon a horse: he had been on
the hunt himself since early in the afternoon; had lurked in brake and
spied from hilltops everywhere about the habitable country, but with no
success. As he came into camp, and found it thus submitted to a kind of
peace he grudged even on the Sabbath, he was filled with indignation.
With him the Road itself was now become a boast although he loathed the
country; every furlong added to its length appeared to him a personal
triumph, every idle hour a crime. The half-a-crown-a-day he got of extra
wages scarcely served to pay the added cost of rations brought
laboriously by pack-horse once a month from Perth, but vanity got ampler
pay in Wade's approval and a sense of pride in being instrument of that
red hack cross the country. Every second Tuesday of the month the
Marshal would appear upon his sheltie, with a staff about him soft and
red and puffed with too fat life and too much drinking in some Lowland
barrack; then it was that Leggatt, tanned and lean and dirty, had a task
to keep his vanity in check when he displayed his latest victory over
natural obstacle, streams vanquished, heights subdued.

No word would Wade say, but a clap upon the back for Captain Trim—that
clap was the best of Leggatt's pay. He knew that he was beating old
Macgillivray, who had the branch of Road across the Monadh Liath, and
had not put a mile to it since June.

This night, then, he was vexed to find the work at pause, although there
was excuse for it: he had not changed his boots or tasted supper when
the bugle cried across the wooden village.

“Turn out!" he told the sergeants. “There's a day been lost! Rain will
be on by morning, and that trenching must be finished now. Let them have
the fires."

When he came out again from that rough shed that was his dwelling,
pitched a bit apart from all the rest, a crimson pennon constant
flapping on its roof, big fires of whin and heather, gathered on good
days and stacked, were burning at the foot of Corryarrick Pass, and
every soldier plied a tool. The scene looked scarcely human. Spread out
half a mile along the red gash through the heath were vague forms moving
in the crackling fire light, as in labours, and in tortures of
perdition; iron clattered, block and tackle creaked, and through the
night rose strange and melancholy cries.

He stayed but long enough to satisfy himself the work went on; conveyed
some orders to the foremen, and went back to where the camp lay dark
completely save for that one light that was his own.

He reached the hut and opened it; two native iron lamps with wicks of
rush were burning; pinned out on his table were some engineering plans.
The place was starkly furnished, like a shipper's box, except that in it
was a soldier's mattress. A soldier-servant at the moment when his
master entered was engaged in turning down the bedclothes for the night.

“Waken me at four," said Leggatt, throwing off his greatcoat; “that's to
say, unless Maclean comes back with any news that's worth my rousing."

The man went out.

A little while—it scarce was quarter of an hour—did Leggatt with a
compass work upon his plans, and then prepared for sleep. He sat upon a
stool and bent to loose his boots; when suddenly, without a footstep to
account for it, he heard a gentle tap upon his door.

“Come in!" he cried, and started to his feet at sight of two men clad in
kilts and strange to him. His solitary situation flashed on him; he was
the only man in camp except his orderly across the square. And one at
least of these two men was armed; a hilt was at his hip. Instinctively
did Leggatt give a glance behind him to a corner where his sword was
hanging.

“No occasion! None whatever," said the elder of the two men quickly.

“You know it is forbidden to have arms about you in this country. Who
are you?" said Leggatt.

“A poor place for the girls, I'm thinking!" was the answer. He dived a
hand into his sporran and took out a paper which he passed to Leggatt.
“That's my licence for my boy the grey one here," he said, and with a
twinkle patted on his claymore.

Leggatt cast an eye upon the document and smiled. “The very man I want
to see! By any chance have you a pinch of snuff on you?"

“I never had the practice; neither has my friend; it spoils the scent."

“That's most vexatious, Mr Campbell!" said the Captain. “I would give my
whole month's pay for just one pinch. However, here you are, and snuff
or no snuff, I am pleased to see you. Sit you down! The Marshal, last
time he was here, let out a hint that you were coming."

“That's a proof a Marshal shouldna know too much," said Ninian. “In this
part of the world my trade was better served if nobody said nothing. I
would come much better speed across the country if folk would not be
clattering. How-and-ever, here I am, and here's my worthy friend
Macmaster, umquhile of Drimdorran, of a namely family."

Leggatt spilled them out a dram and drank their healths himself, and was
about to leave the hut when Ninian stopped him.

“Where are you for?" he asked.

“You're staying, surely, for the night?" said Leggatt. “I was going to
see about your sleeping quarters."

“Not one step!" said Ninian hastily. “Keep shut that door! I would not,
for the world, have any of your people ken that we were here."

“They must have seen you come into the camp," said Leggatt with
surprise.

“Indeed they didn't; we took care o' that, the cunning pair of us! If
you will let us stretch upon the floor here till the early morning, then
we'll slip away, and nobody need be a bit the wiser that Macgregor
Campbell ever was at Corryarrick."

Leggatt threw up his hands in dismay. “You cannot go like that!" said
he. “There's urgent business for you. Last night we had some trouble
here with a marauding gang of ruffians. They fell upon a small convoy
from Stirling coming with the pay-chest for my fellows. A dirty
business!—several men were wounded in the scuffle."

“Did they get the kist?" asked Ninian eagerly.

“In faith they did! My men last night were scouring through the country
for it; I've been out myself all day. Now you must wait and help me, Mr
Campbell; I was lippening on your help. You see I know your reputation."

“Not all of it, I hope!" said Ninian with a grimace. “Have ye a bit of
anything for us to eat? We havena touched a morsel since a
meal-and-water drammock that I picked the oats for from a field at
Garva."

As fortune had it, Leggatt had a piece of loin of deer upon a shelf: he
set it down in front of them, and as they ate he talked to them about
the Road and all his troubles. Æneas it was who talked the most with
him; he had experienced some tremor of the soul when first he came
across a hillock in the night and saw so many men far from their homes
at work like creatures under judgment in the glare of Tophet fires.

“You like the work?" he asked.

“At times I hate it!" Leggatt cried with fervour. “Then, again, at
times, and oftenest, on the whole, I wouldn't call the King my cousin;
my work comes over me like drink! I like it, man!—to see my mark—John
Leggatt's mark!—away back yonder, through the hill and heather, and
feel a kind of glow to think it will be there for generations after I'm
below the divots."

“I understand!" cried Æneas, generously uplifted. “I understand! The one
thing I have seen since I left home that made me proud of human-kind is
this place on the hills. I think, myself, your task is noble!"

The Captain flushed; that spirit pleased him. “So I think, myself," he
said. “I'm not like to be much the richer at the hinder-end, but still
it is something to have helped to put a light up here." And then he
looked at both of them, abruptly stopping in his speech, his glance
peculiarly on their Gaelic clothing. “You are Highlanders yourselves,"
he added hurriedly, “but I can tell you this,—it is a dark country we
are in this moment—dark, and deep, and cunning! It's come to this with
me that I declare to you I'm sometimes frightened.
Plots—schemes—roguery of some infernal kind in every slated house from
here to Inverness, and I'm mistaken if the hatching's not done somewhere
in that quarter."

“You're meaning Yon One?" Ninian remarked with interest.

“I'm mentioning no names, Mr Campbell. All I know is that some very
cunning agent is behind a lot of things that's happened since Lovat's
Highland company was taken from him. And now there's this affair about
the chest; it puts the copestone on my troubles. If I cannot trace that
chest and punish them that took it, Wade will roast me like a herring.
Now, you that knows the country and the people, Mr Campbell, could
assist me greatly to discover where my chest has gone, and who they were
who took it. I wish your friend and you would stay with me a little."

“As for myself, I'd like to stay some days and see the Road," said
Æneas. “It's mainly what I came for."

Ninian shook his head. “Na, na!" said he; “we must be off! To let ye
know the truth o't, Captain Leggatt, we were in a habble of our own last
night on Laggan-side, and 'twixt a small Doune pistol and the pair of us
we killed a man."

The countenance of Leggatt fell. “That's bad!" says he. “That's dooms
bad!" and walked the floor.

“The thing was forced on us," said Æneas. “The shot was mine. He had a
musket levelled at my friend, and I behove to act."

“And well ye did it, lad!" cried Ninian. “Whatever o't, the man was
killed between us, not to mention other two that I gave yon with
Gentle Colin," and he clapped his claymore's head that had its chin upon
the table.

“I wish—I wish—" said Leggatt, stuttering; “I wish this hadn't
happened. You see yourself it's awkward, Mr Campbell? I wish it had not
been in my domain. About what place was the encounter?"

“Druimbeg," said Ninian. “Ye'll maybe ken it? Off and on, a score of wee
black houses, no' a white among them."

“I know the place," said Leggatt. “All Macdonalds, and a gey bad lot!
They're out of Keppoch's lands, but he'll make cause with them. There
will be trouble."

“That's what I was thinking," Ninian said warmly. “And it will fairly
spoil my reputation if the thing came out that I had any hand in such a
business. Ye have some Hielandmen among your corps; I thought of that,
and waited till the night before I came to ye; at any cost the name of
Ninian Campbell must be dark. There's no one but yourself need know that
we were here, or were the men in trouble at Loch Laggan."

“But if I'm asked," said Leggatt. “There's a point of duty. An
officer——. It is the last place you should have come with such a
story!"

Ninian stretched himself composedly and yawned. “Naile!" said he, “the
fault, to start wi', was your own; ye should have put your kist in
better hands. It was because we came athwart your kist the trouble
happened. Do ye want it back?"

“I'd be your friend for life!" cried Leggatt.

“If ye can spare a couple of scores of wise-like men and send them off
at once, they'll find it at Druimbeg, although I'm no' so sure they'll
get much in it."

In half a dozen sentences he told what he had seen.

“By heavens!" said Leggatt, “I'll give them the lesson! I'll start
myself, at once, and you stop here till morning; nobody will disturb
you; I will lock the door."

He rose to leave them. “Give a glance," said Æneas, “at a kirk that's in
the fir-wood on the shore."

“I clean forgot that!" Ninian said. “Ye'll need some creels and horses;
there's a booty in the chapel yonder worth your while—a stack of
splendid muskets!"

Leggatt, with some final words of caution for them, hurried out and
locked the door behind him. They heard him in a little, bawling;
by-and-by the bugle blew, assembling. Ninian turned to Æneas with a grin
of satisfaction.

“I knew I had the size of him," said he. “He's just a Lanrig calf that
wants to be a major, cocked up in his own conceit. Canna trust the
Hielandmen, quo' he! 'Dark, and deep, and cunning,' are they? A
fine-like thing to say to you and me, Macmaster! Now that he's got the
kist and all yon guns, you'll never hear our names connected wi' the
business; you'll see that all the credit after this will go to Captain
Leggatt. If you come back again you'll maybe find your man was shot by
Leggatt's own right hand."




CHAPTER XIII.

IN THE WAY OF TRADE.


Throughout the early morning hours rain pelted on the roof; a gale was
blowing through the land; the halyard of the pennon over Leggatt's hut
would rap at times against the wooden gable like a signal for admission.
Half a dozen times did Ninian, alarmed, start up from where he stretched
upon the floor with Colin rolled up in his plaid for pillow. As soon as
it was dawn enough to see, he shaved himself, and looked about, and came
upon a horn of ink, a pen, and paper on the window-sill. With them he
was engaged when Æneas, lying on the Captain's blankets, waked a moment,
turned upon his side, and asked what he was doing.

“What am I but at the clerking!" Ninian said. “Leggatt will have a
glyde-post runner for his letters to the south, and it's well to take
the chance to send a line to Inveraray."

“When you are finished with the pen I'll write my uncle, too," said
Æneas, and slept again till Ninian shook him up for counsel on a point
that gave him trouble. The chronicle he worked at was, officially, for
Islay, but the writer knew it had to pass, first, through the hands of
Duncanson, and this called for a guarded pen. No word was said of what
had happened at Loch Laggan; simply was it stated that the Messenger had
reached the scene of these untoward happenings whose scrutiny had called
him hither, and already had employed his craft with profit to the
situation. The kernel of his story was a vaunt about the smuggling of
arms and his discovery of its meaning. “They are hereabouts in loads,"
he wrote; “brought in like herring by the cran, poor stuff, but seeming
good enough for selling. Your L'ship will have mind of my dubieties
about your L'ship's notion of a Rising. There is, or I am cheated,
nothing in the Air no more than when I had last time the honour to be in
these parts on your L'ships' commands. The guns is meant for honest
trade. I had the fortune to come on a pickle stored by some Mackdonals,
chiefless men, but cunning. The Mackdonals, poor wratches, have not a
groat to spare on such cargoes, but will be my endeavours betwixt
Badenoch and the town of Inverness to put the bridle on the man that has
the purse. Of this I have no fears, but will get my man. The one thing
that has vexed me most since leaving Inveraray, Wednesday was a week, is
that Col Mackdonal, Esquire, Barisdale, his Watch, and sundry others
were against my coming from Glen Orchy on. Barisdale is an arrant rogue.
Of this I have the proofs. This business I will go into at a more
fitting time. But I must say I was ill prepared to have a leakage of
your L'ship's private commands to your obed't servant. The whole
country, from the Braes of Glen Orchy till this, was seemingly well
advertisit of my coming. Your L'ship or His Grace, or Mr Duncanson, will
be best fitted to guess who was in a position to give the alarm to the
Enemy. I can assure your L'ship it has been a great calculation to me.
But I am in hopes to clear the matter before I set my face to Argyll."

So far, his letter put no strain on Ninian's judgment, but the fact that
Duncanson would read it in Lord Islay's absence raised a serious
question. Should he mention Æneas?

“That's the bit that bothers me," he said to Æneas, and chewed his pen.
“Duncanson may ken already that you're in my company, thanks to your
speckled horse! but then, on the other hand, he mayna. The man may never
have jaloused who aucht the horse in the stall at Bridge of Orchy. Ye
see the point? I'll leave it to yourself to say if I should mention
anything."

“If you're afraid——" said Æneas.

“I'm not afraid of anything!" cried Ninian. “Drimdorran can burst
himself wi' ire, for me. It's you I'm thinking of. Since you're in
company wi' me, he'll know ye're going to Inverness, and might send word
there, stirring trouble over yon bit snuffbox. That snuffbox will hang
in my mind; give me your hand on it ye did not touch it."

“I told ye so already!" Æneas cried angrily. “My name is not Macgregor;
I'm no thief!" and thereupon began to button on his coat. “I wish I
never met you!" he declared. “You brought me into murder, and my sleep
is spoiled for me with dreams of yon poor wretch I shot, and now you
challenge me with thieving and with lying!"

“Whist!" said Ninian, with alarm. “Cry out like that and everything is
spoiled; ye'll call attention to our hiding. Sit ye down, Æneas,
loachain, and never mind my joke. Indeed there's many a queer
Macgregor, at the thiefing and the lying too. You'll never hear me
mention snuffbox more. But listen, you, to this—the more I think of you
and Mr Duncanson, the more I think there's something else between ye
than the girl."

“He never liked me—that I know!" said Æneas, cooling down.

“The doocot by itself was not what roused him; what it was I'll find out
yet. The man was fairly stricken when he looked his desk and spluttered
something to himsel' about his keys. He sallowed in the colour like a
frosted leaf. It looks to me as if he had some devilish thing in hiding
and was frightened ye had found it."

“I know nothing about that," said Æneas. “Write them I am with you, if
you like."

“I think, myself, that would be better," Ninian agreed, and took his pen
again. “Always it is best to be above the board in matters, and forbye,
I'll wager anything Drimdorran knows already."

But then he started up before a word was written, beat his brow, and
turned on Æneas a baffled visage. “I canna clear my mind of this," he
said with passion. “Whence came Niall of Succoth on his horse to warn
Breadalbane? Niall's Drimdorran's cousin's man! The shauchle of a
fellow that came wi' me to take back my horse from Orchy had a letter
from Drimdorran to his cousin. That was in my mind the whole day through
the corries."

“I can make nothing of it," said Æneas, impatient.

“Indeed and ye canna!" said Ninian; “it will take me all my time
myself," and finished off his letter, wrote another short one to his
daughter, and gave up his pen to Æneas, who plunged into a full account
of everything for Alan-Iain-Alain Og. It occupied him half an hour, and
all the time was Ninian staring slyly from the window in a key of some
impatience for a sign of Leggatt's coming back to let them free from
their confinement. Nobody was moving in the camp; they could have left
it then without an eye upon them, and so thick the vapours of the
morning hung above the ground it favoured an escape that later in the
day would be less easy for them.

“Mind what ye are saying to your uncle, lad!" said Ninian at last,
uneasy at the length of Æneas's billet. “Letters hereabouts go wandering
at times. If ye are saying anything at all about Loch Laggan, tell him
to be sure and keep his thumb on't."

“I'll see to that," said Æneas. “But tell me this—you promised me a
laugh about the muskets?"

“Ay!" said Ninian, “that I did! But wait you till the Captain comes, and
we will laugh, the pair of us, at him, together. Whatever o't, it's not
a joke for paper; finish you your scribbling. There's nothing in't, I
hope, about Drimdorran?"

“Only that I'll settle things with him when I get back," said Æneas.

“Just that!" said Ninian. “Very good indeed! I'll slip your letter
inside Janet's, hers inside Drimdorran's; that will save some shillings
for the post. You aye be saving shillings, and ye'll make a splendid
merchant, just as good's your uncle Alan."

They hunted high and low for sealing-wax, and had not come on it, when
suddenly they both were startled by a key turned quickly in the door;
Leggatt, dripping from the rain, stepped in, threw down a pair of
moor-fowl on the table, and before a word was said, took out a bottle
from a press. It held some whisky flavoured with wild herbs like gentian
and camomile; he poured the three of them a little draught; “There's
nothing better for the morning damp," says he, and gulps his portion.
“If I had just a bawbee's worth of snuff, now, everything was right!
You're sure you havena any, Mr Campbell?"

“Not one morsel!" Ninian assured him. “What speed came ye yonder!"

Leggatt seized their hands. “My word," said he, “and you have done the
turn for me! I'll not forget it, gentlemen. If you are in the humour yet
for going on this morning, half an hour from now must see you started.
My men are on the road behind me. I came through the hills and brought
you there your breakfast, but you haven't time to cook it."

And then, as if relieved himself from some anxiety, he said rejoicingly,
“There's no one killed at all! The man you thought was dead was supping
kail when we came on him; the bullet just went through his side."

“Thank God for that!" cried Æneas. “Since I was born I never heard a bit
of news so welcome!" He could not sit, he could not stand, at first, for
joy at Leggatt's tidings; like one half-crazed he stamped the room, and
rubbed his eyes, and gave a little skip or two as if to start to dance.
“I'll never fire a gun again!" said he, and took his uncle's letter
hurriedly, and put another line to it that told of this relief. The rest
of Leggatt's news seemed immaterial to him, but Ninian heard it with a
pleasure nigh as great as that the man was living.

When Leggatt and his party reached Druimbeg, the wounded three were all
the men to be discovered. The rest had taken to the hills and left the
pay-chest with its locks unbroken, hidden in a peat-stack. Terror held
the women when the troops appeared, and Leggatt played on it, believing
it concerned the chest alone, whose hiding-place they showed him on a
threat of burning down the township. He had the muskets loaded into
panniers when a half-wit boy betrayed the thing that most dismayed the
women—two men had been fighting with their husbands and been drowned.

“My notion at the start," said Leggatt, “was to let them think that you
were men of mine; it looked the easiest way to meet your wishes, Mr
Campbell."

“And a very good plan too!" said Ninian eagerly. “Myself I couldna
better it. But you go on about the drownded men."

“My men were quite confounded when they saw the fellows wounded; I had,
of course, said not a cheep to them of what I knew, but when I found
your gentleman was in a frame for kail—a very different thing from
dead—I passed the word that I would take the credit for his state and
the other two you struck. I found them smeared with salve and drenched
with whisky."

“Nothing better!" Ninian agreed; “but what about the drowning? That's
the bit."

“I'm coming to that," said Leggatt. “But you see my point? By rights I
should have searched the hill and taken prisoners, just to give the pack
a lesson. But I'm aye loth for prisoners; it means convoys to Inverness,
and trials, and a great expense of men and time much better spent in
digging. I thought myself the rogues had got enough to be a warning, and
(to make the story short) I just let on the two who did the damage to
their men were Highlanders of mine."

“Capital!" cried Ninian. “I told you, Æneas, we could put our trust in
Captain Leggatt."

“A woman took a sixpence from a bowl, and threw it at my feet when I
said that, and swore she would not let it foul her children's hands. I
could not make her out, but one of mine, a sergeant of Lochaber, told me
she was bitter that the men should take her meat and water when they
were on such a business. She said it beat Glencoe."

“It's a great pity, poor body, she should lose the sixpence," said
Ninian. “But time's aye slipping past, and we'll be needing to take legs
for it immediately. I'm asking ye, by any chance, are we the men that's
drowned?"

“That's just it!" said Leggatt, laughing. “The boat was got adrift
without her oars and full of water. They never saw you land, and now
you're clear of everything."

“Man, that's fine!" said Ninian. “I shoved the boat off, on a chance, in
mind of yon that happened on Loch Duich, Æneas, and there's a lesson to
ye, now, to aye be taking steps to kill the scent behind ye."

“But that was not the end of it," said Leggatt. “Before we left the
place I thought my scheme was foundered. Have you had any trouble with
the Watch of Barisdale?"

“My sorrow, but I had!" cried Ninian. “Is that long rascal still in
chase of me?"

“It looked a bit like that. Five men of his came up the loch when we
were on the point of leaving; heard about the drowning from the women,
said they knew the men, and gave your names. They came to me and argued
out the point of your identity, and I can tell you they were not much
stricken at your loss. I swore they were mistaken——"

“Hoots!" said Ninian, aback, “I wish ye hadna. Far better snugly drowned
than yon one on my track."

“They had been looking for you."

“Yes, and now they'll look again! It's time we steeped the withies, lad,
and took the road for't. Put the birds into your poke. Will you can send
a letter, Captain?"

“A runner goes to Perth on Friday," Leggatt answered, and got wax out
from a box. They sealed the letters, Islay's that contained the others,
last, and Leggatt slipped it in his pocket. “It will take a week at
least," said he.

“That's soon enough," said Ninian, and strapped his knapsack on. “Ye got
the guns, then?"

“That itself was worth my while," said Leggatt, opening the door an inch
or two and looking out. The rain was driving. Nobody beyond themselves
was stirring in the camp.

“I'm glad you're pleased wi' them," said Ninian; “and what are muskets
bringing at the market?"

But Leggatt thought the question trivial, or more likely feared delay;
he pointed to a hut that smoked across the square. “My man is up," said
he. “Keep down the brae until you reach the burn, then up the Road; the
banks will hide you."

They cast their plaids about them, and sped quickly with the wind
through rushes water-laden, dipping to the burn. The gale was blowing
with a great commotion; little of the mountains could be seen for mist.
“I think that I could run to Inverness without a stop," said Æneas,
still uplifted with blood-innocence, a beaming on his face.

“Ye canna do't! The thing's impossible!" his friend replied with
seriousness, and Æneas laughed at him.

“You promised me a laugh about the muskets, but I never got it. I must
just be cheery on my own account," said Æneas.

“There's not much of a laugh in it except we have a sodger," Ninian said
gravely, plashing through the grass. “Our hurry, leaving, spoiled the
thing; I meaned to get a scoff at Leggatt; yon's as smart a man as ever
put his feet in good king's leather, and has a royal hand at putting
round the bottle, but he wants yon!" and saying so he cracked his
fingers. “I'll wager you he's still of the belief that getting guns is
stopping Risings."

“What honest trade do you think they're for?" asked Æneas.

“What for but selling to the Army? Ye've heard of the Disarming Act?
Donald wouldna give his dirk and gun for nothing to the king, and so for
years the king is paying well for every piece surrendered at a barrack.
It cost three thousand pounds last year for weapons handed in at Ruthven
by Macphersons—rusted swords, and broken dirks, and foundered muskets;
no' a decent arm among them! Where do ye think they came from? Straight
from Holland! It is not his own good gear at all that Donald gives them,
just some merchant trash from Rotterdam. What we got in the chapel
yonder, or I'm sore mistaken, is part of a cargo landed in the Forth a
month ago. That was what alarmed MacCailein and Lord Islay; when they
got wind of it the other day they were assured it meant another Rising,
and I was fool enough at times to think there might be something in it,
till I saw this rubbish in Druimbeg. The truth came to me yonder like
the chorus of a song. Little did I think it was in chapel I would get
the key to what this traffic meant—a lesson to us all to go to kirk!"

“Upon my word," cried Æneas, “I think you have the truth of it!"

“Of course I have!" said Ninian, and cocked his bonnet. “Better far than
farming! Man, there's money in't! The Hielandman is learning business
fast, and that's the New Road for you!"

“But who provides the capital?" asked Æneas. “Yon poor wretches couldn't
ship a cargo."

“That's the bit!" said Ninian slyly; “that's for me to find!"

The grouse-cock and his wife were quarrelling among the mist upon the
braes within a stone-throw of the roadmen's works, and on a knoll the
deer were grazing, with a stag at gaze. The bottom of a bleak hill
showed, and through a cleft of it let fall a cataract that made a din.
Steep, lifting to the west, there ran the latest gash of Leggatt,
stripped of turf, with swinging engines over it, and carts, and soil
high-banked along its sides. The two men rose to it. A row of pegs, with
here and there a rag of colour on them, stretched up from the level,
swerved but once about a cliff that hid it for a while, and then marched
on again until it reached the misty summit, where a flag was waving like
an invitation into space.




CHAPTER XIV.

INVERNESS.


At seven of the clock on third October, in the morning, and the weather
still so good that bees were humming in the withered heather, Ninian and
Æneas stood on a hillock looking east, and saw below them, at some miles
of distance, steeples of a town, a noble stream that went about some
wooded island gardens, and a bay. Ships were lying at the quay; a
citadel was on a knoll, and in it pipers blew a rouse; a bridge of many
arches spanned the river; upwards from the streets came sounds of men
and hammering, and a great fresh smoke of morning fires. Although the
countryside was almost void of trees, the winding frith, the cultivated
plain, the Grampians beyond them and the heaping clouds of silver, made
enchantment for the young man's eye.

“Oh man! Is that not fine!" cried he upliftedly in Gaelic.

“Indeed it's not so bad at all!" said Ninian in that language. And then
said he “—to look at! Myself, though, always better liked the great
brave lands of trees. The like of thou and me are people of the woods. A
man would need to move here circumspectly; where would he take hiding
with a booty?"

Folk of the wood, indeed, were they since they had climbed on
Corryarrick and came down Glen Tarff. They never moved but in the night,
or early in the morning while the mists still hung and glamoured;
through day they lay in thickets, under banks on water-edges; in forest
deeps they made small fires. Their clothing had the smell of burning
sticks. The morning they had left the camp of Leggatt they had skirted
wide of Fort Augustus, peeping at its bastions from behind a clump of
brambles, hearing on its walls a sentry cry, and seeing on a field
beside it redcoats drill. Ninian would not go near it; nothing was to
learn there, he maintained, and he was all for places unfrequented. It
was this fancy for lone ways aloof from folk that gave him preference
for the west side of Loch Ness; they might have easier reached their
journey's end by passing through Strath Errick, but that land was thick
with Lovat's people, and for Lovat's people Ninian at the moment had no
inclination. They took them to the hills and crossed the glens of
Moriston and Urquhart in the dark; a land all strange to Ninian, and yet
they never strayed,—he airted by the dip of rocks, the growth of
timber, sometimes by the run of streams, or by the stars. He travelled
by the “feel of things," he said, when vision failed him; always at the
dawn they found them coverts where the first thing he would do was aye
to start at shaving. There would they lurk while he caught food—a
cudgelled grouse upspringing from his feet, one time a roe ingeniously
captured, twice at least a fish or two for which he plied a switch cut
from the river-side.

The roe was strangely got. They lay one morning in Glen Urquhart, in
behind a rock, when passing went a cripple man who bore the deer slung
on his shoulder. “A wise-like beast!" said Ninian. “I wish we had a
rib," and then upon a thought ran up along the hill, and down upon the
track the fellow must pursue, and off a single shoe and threw it where
the man must see it. The shoe was sorely worn by travelling, and he that
had the deer but looked at it and threw it down again. But half a mile
away he came upon the other shoe of Ninian, this one not so bad, and
thereupon put down the roe as Ninian expected, and went back to get the
other. Ninian took the roe and put it in a hole, and dined that day on
venison.

“You would cheat the heron off her eggs, and she with her two eyes on
you!" said Æneas in admiration.

“No cheatery at all," said Ninian; “the man's the richer by a pair of
bauchles," and put on the brogues he brought from Inveraray in his poke.

But still that dinner cost them two days and a night of skulking on Glen
Urquhart edge; the man who lost the deer came on the embers of the fire
that cooked it, and brought out his friends to hunt them. They could not
stick a head from out the cave they hid in but they saw some figure
posted on the hill. Now Michaelmas was past, they ate of nuts and
berries; once they ventured to a hovel near the loch and got some milk
and bread; their last night out was spent in birches in The Aird.

No wonder Æneas looked on Inverness with quickened eyes; the steeples
and the streets, its frank and open situation, promised a relief from
all the hazards and the hardships of the week bygone, and—what was even
more delightful to escape from—that uneasy sense of menace in the
sunniest weather, in the loneliest places, strange airs of ambuscade and
plot that followed him and Ninian since they had left their homes.

“Thank God," cried he, “for streets! It's glad I'll be to have my soles
upon a causeway!"

The other put his level hand above his eyes and peered across the
glittering morning at the town that smoked.

“A town," said he, “is just made up of people. The more folk the more
mischief! My father—peace be with him!—used to say for every man that
has his sword out for you on the hill, a hundred men are feeling at your
pockets in the burgh lands; ay, yes, and following you with hatred and
with lies! Give me the grass and heather for't against my foe! I'm far
more frightened for myself in Inverness than on the Moor of Rannoch, for
it's far too far away from Inveraray and the whistle of MacCailein." He
gave that one word “whistle" like a cry from Cruachan.

“There's nobody dare touch us here!" said Æneas loftily.

Ninian twitched the belt that hung his knapsack—“That's to see!" quo'
he, and glowered. “Many a nimble lad thought that in Lovat's land, and
now his bones are bleaching to the wind or cankering in the dungeon, or
he is shivering to the lash in the plantations. Thou and me will better
stick together till we're out o't."

They shaved themselves and washed them in a burn, and went down slopes
of heather and through garnered fields, and crossed the river where some
girls, high-kilted to the thighs, were posting blankets. Everywhere the
town was busy: bands of merchant-men were standing at the cross: it was
a market-day, and in the gutters of the street poor country folk with
webs of linen, scraggy hens, and cheeses, proffered bargains. Some
officers in red were hanging round a coffee-house; men of the Highland
Companies who spoke the Gaelic lounged upon the middle of the causeway,
every kind of arm except a gun hung to them, feathers in their bonnets,
targets on their backs. A ragged woman with her bairns was whining some
lugubrious ditty of a sailor lost, and getting now and then a bodle for
her song. About the Tolbooth gates some wicked-looking lads were
hanging, signalling to folk behind the window bars. The sun shone on the
town and made it white as marble; it was mostly built of rubble, harled
and washed with lime. Some parts of it were like bastiles, so stern and
bare the tenements, with turnpike stairs that led to dwellings over
shops; the wynds and lanes were full of playing dogs and barefoot
children.

Although they wore the kilt, the two were no way odd to see upon the
streets; more kilts than trews were on the causeway, but the sword of
Ninian sometimes caught a questioning eye, and at the very entrance to a
vintner's inn that he had fixed on for their lodging he was challenged
by an English sergeant.

“Friend, what about your sword?" said he. “Have you a licence?"

“Ye may be sure of that, my clever lad!" said Ninian with a twitching
eyebrow and a mocking lip. “If you will bring the gentleman that owns
you, I will let him read it."

The sergeant had another glance at them; perceived some look of
consequence about their bearing, muttered an excuse, and took his way.

They breakfasted on herring and a mutton ham, then sallied out and in a
warehouse bought them each a suit of Lowland fashion and a London hat.
With some reluctance Ninian left Grey Colin in the vintner's keeping
with the clothes of John Maclaren, and put his dirk well down his back
between the shoulders, underneath his coat.

“And now," said he, “I'll tell ye what ye'll do. Ye'll go away at once
and put your money in charge of him that is your uncle's man. Make you
your plans wi' him about your business, and come here for dinner.
Myself, I'm going out the town a bit to make a call. Take you your
Virgin nut——"

“Not I!" said Æneas, laughing; “keep it till it grows a tree, for me!"
and off he went to meet his uncle's agent in the guidance of the
vintner's boy.

The forenoon yet was young when Ninian, trimly shaved, a rattan-cane in
hand, his guinea hat a little cocked upon his forehead, left the town
and walked into the country till he reached a great stark house with
planted grounds close by a windy moor. It was the house of Duncan
Forbes, Lord Advocate, the man who under God, MacCailein, and Lord
Islay, kept King's law at trot throughout the country. Ninian asked to
see him, waiting in a stone-flagged hall with arms and cabar-heads of
deer in it. More odd to see, there was a gantry, with a cask of claret
wine upon the spigot, and a pail beside it.

From out a spacious room, that was resounding with the jovial din of
company, the Advocate, a man of middle age, came to him, flushed a
little at the gills, a stern official mien assumed that was put off
immediately he recognised his caller.

“Campbell!" said he, and thumped him on the back. “You have got through!
Have you found anything?" His eyes were lit with eagerness; he licked
his lips. He closed the door upon the noisy company he had left, led
Ninian round the cask of claret, through a lobby to a tiny room, and
there poured forth on him a spate of questions.

“I have found out two things of the three, my lord, that sent me here,"
said Ninian—“that Hieland Watches are no use at all, or worse than
useless, and that guns are very rife in Badenoch."

“I doubted that myself," said Forbes. “Twenty thousand pounds we've
spent on them, and still they're pouring in. It looks as if they grew
them in the glens like oats. And always rubbish—where's the good stuff
lying? What about that cargo to Blackness?"

“I came upon a bit of that," said Ninian, and straightway, leaving out
the skirmish by Loch Laggan, told what he had found and what were his
conclusions.

“By heavens, you're right!" cried Forbes. “I might have guessed it.
Never was such rowth of money in among the clans. That cargo made me
anxious; now it's just a joke to laugh at. This is an Occasion, Mr.
Campbell; we must wet it from Macneill of Barra's library." He had a
jovial eye; a lip that trembled now and then with fun.

He opened up a cabinet of black mahogany in which a dozen bottles,
square, with gilt on them, were fitted, picked out one choke-full of
brandy, splashed out for himself and Ninian a hearty bumper.

“I thank you very much indeed, my lord," said Ninian, “but I daurna. Not
when I'm on business, and I'm thinking I'll need all my water wits in
Inverness."

“Very good," said Forbes without demur, and, opening a window, emptied
both the glasses on the grass outside. “If some of my gentry in
there"—and he jerked a thumb across his shoulder—“were so wise as the
Duke's beachdair, the office of Lord Advocate was not sometimes so
merry, nor my knowledge of my countrymen so deep. . . . Who brings the
guns from Holland, Mr Campbell? That's the bit! These tenant bodies
havena got the cash."

“I thought, my lord, ye could have told me that yoursel'," said Ninian,
twitching down his brows and rubbing at his chin.

“No, no!" said Forbes, a sly smile on his face, “you need not tell me
that, Mr Campbell. I know your work of old, and I'll wager you already
have your eye upon the parties most concerned. It's not to precognosce
the Advocate you're calling on me here. . . . Very well! keep you your
news for Islay or his Grace—so long as it gets there it's all the same
to me and Scotland."

“Upon the soul of me and on the dirk," cried Ninian, “I'm telling you as
much as what I know mysel' for certain."

“Hoot-toot!" the Advocate said drolly, with a twinkle. “The dirk, I
see,'s behind your back; it nearly broke my fingers when I thumped you
there. It ill becomes a Messenger-at-Arms to carry weapons that way."

“The hills themselves are not more wise than you, my lord," said Ninian
with a laugh. “Not every gentleman could guess my backbone was the
biodag. But faith, I'm needin' it. Since ever I got up the Orchy
people have been round me like a rabble, making trouble, and I'm greatly
under fear they know my business."

“How on earth, sir, could they? No one knew that you were coming but
myself, and Wade, and Islay."

“And still-and-on, the news has leaked, my lord; there's no dubieties
about it. Barisdale himsel' was put upon my track."

“Barisdale! Oh-ho!" said Forbes, and tapped upon a snuff-mull, pursing
up his cheeks and drawing down his eyebrows like a man who peeped on
things behind.

“I saw him lift a creach, my lord. The man's a blackguard," Ninian
said hotly, and quickly told of tricky Col's device for getting cattle.

“And he was in this very house three weeks ago and borrowed Virgil! A
little dipped in drink, but still the perfect gentleman. I'll have to
make a study of my classic friend. Say not a word of this to anyone till
I turn round."

“Not a cheep!" said Ninian.

“You say that Barisdale was after you. In whose interest?"

“I thought, my lord, ye might have helped me there too," said Ninian,
and shuffled with his feet.

“My good Mr Campbell, you thought nothing of the kind. I need not tell
you, Mr Campbell, that a man in my position knows nothing—till it's
told him with the proofs. I'm much mistaken in you if you do not guess
already who could have an interest in hampering you by means of Col
Macdonnell."

“I canna put a name on him as yet, my lord. But stop you! I'll find
out!"

The Advocate took out his watch and looked the time. “My friends inbye,"
said he in homely fashion, “are in trim, I fancy, for a chack of meat;
you must come ben and join us, Mr Campbell. But first I want to know
what brought you here to me if all your news is meant for Inveraray?"

“I thought," said Ninian, “to get a hint from you, my lord. There's not
another gentleman in all the North I dare put trust in."

“It's good of you to say so, Mr Campbell, but we'll not, just now, be
bothering with the flatteries. Something more important's in your mind;
the sooner you come out with it the better. Just to give a lead to you,
I'll ask you who was with you coming North?"

Ninian bit his nether lip, a little staggered. “There's not much hid
from you, my lord," said he. “And I was thinking I came yonder like the
fox! There must be quicker ways for news to Inverness than over
Corryarrick, through the Aird."

“Many a way, and still the best of them a little devious. Wait till we
have got the Road! The fox should never hunt in couples; you had never
trouble when you came alone before on business, Mr Campbell. Who's the
brisk young lad?"

“I'll tell you that, my lord, without a twisted word," said Ninian. “His
name is Æneas Macmaster, son of Paul Macmaster, one time of Drimdorran.
He came on business for his uncle."

“Macmaster of Drimdorran—let me see now—he was 'tainted for Glenshiel
and lost his life about that time?"

“Is that quite sure, my lord?" cried Ninian quickly.

“I have never heard it doubted, sir," said Forbes. “By all accounts the
man was drowned in fleeing through Kintail."

“That's the tale, I ken," said Ninian, “but who saw Paul Macmaster
dead?"

“It's fourteen years ago," said Forbes, “and it's a strong presumption
that he's dead enough that no one ever saw him living since."

“I'm not so sure of that!" said Ninian, blurting out his words with
feeling. “A thing befell when I met Barisdale that bothers me—he let
slip that he and Paul Macmaster were at fencing once in Castle Dounie
when Macmaster had a wounded arm. 'Before he went abroad,' says
Barisdale—note that, my lord! Now, Paul Macmaster, as I know, because
my father told me, never got a wound in all his life until the battle of
Glenshiel, where he was cut across the shoulder by a man of Clayton's
Corps—a thing that never would have happened, as my father said, if he
had not forgot the first time in his life to take the Virgin nut with
him when he went off wi' Glendaruel."

“The Virgin nut," said Forbes. “What haivers have we here!"

“It was a luck-piece in the family, my lord, and came from Barra; I have
no faith in things like that mysel', but haivers or no haivers, the bit
is that Macmaster was wounded at Glenshiel, and Barisdale fenced after
that with him in Castle Dounie. That being so, he couldna have been
drowned, as rumour went."

“On that," remarked the Advocate, “there falls one observation to be
made—it's not without the bounds of fair hypothesis that Barisdale is
lying."

“To what end, my lord?" asked Ninian eagerly. “A lie like that would
serve him nothing! Forbye, it came too glibly from him. He must have met
Macmaster, for he knew that Æneas was his image. Did ever you, sir, hear
of Paul Macmaster in this neighbourhood before the year 'Nineteen?"

“No," said the Advocate, “I think that was his first indulgence in
sedition in the North. And what, I ask you, Mr Campbell, was Macmaster
doing in—in the place you mention? Lord Lovat at the time was—was
loyal."

The Messenger said not a word in answer, only looked from under lowered
eyelids, something crafty in his manner. “You must be careful, Mr
Campbell," Forbes went on, himself disturbed a little, fumbling with his
watch.

“I never spoke a name, my lord," said Ninian in haste. “It was yourself
that named him!"

“Let any name that slipped me be delete. I hardly need to warn you, Mr
Campbell. . . . H'm! Your story is a bit fantastic. In any case a
tangled hank for fourteen years . . . a little rotten, Mr Campbell! And
supposing that Macmaster was in Castle Dounie after he went
missing. . . . H'm! It's this way of it, my good man" (and here he sat
down on a chair and drummed his fingers on his knees), “what's the good
of blowing ashes grey and cold for fourteen years? God knows there's
plenty to engage you and me and your employers in the rogueries and
plottings of to-day without us tugging at a tangled line that leads we
ken not where."

“I see your point, my lord," said Ninian, and bit his finger-nails. And
then said he, “I never tug a line, my lord; I have been far too long at
fishing. A tangled hank of line, my lord, with any luck at all, can only
have two ends to it, and here I think I have got one—that Paul
Macmaster was alive when folk were mourning for him! Any wise-like man
wi' patience can get clear a tangled hank if only he keeps
teasing—teasing." He showed his teeth in a peculiar smile, and made
some movements with his fingers—“The thing's to keep the tangle loose,
my lord; I never saw a tangled line but I was itching to be at it."

“It seems to me," said Forbes, “the question could be settled by your
asking Col exactly when he met Macmaster."

“I asked him, sir! I asked him!" cried out Ninian. “You may be sure of
that! I darena ask him wi' the young man there, but got him by himself,
and then it was I found his tale was surely true, for he made an attempt
to change it. A lie well stuck to looks at last like truth to him that
tells and him that hears it; I've often thought myself, sir, truth was
just conviction. But when the wild beast of the wood goes doubling
before the dogs, ye may be sure, my lord, he's not going home to where's
his litter. When I got drawing Barisdale, his eyes betrayed him, and he
started doubling. He hummed and hawed, and said his meeting with
Macmaster was at Castle Tiorram, old Clanranald's place. And then again,
says he, he doubted if the man was Paul Macmaster after all; he feared
he had mixed up two different occasions and two different men. With that
I couldna push the question further, but bold Col was in my grasp! The
story that he told me first was true, and when he found me curious he
tried to blind the scent. My lord, he was in fear of something!"

“My learned friend has many sides to him," said Forbes, reflecting.

“The outside is the best of him, my lord; inside the man's as boss as
Peter's drum. 'Macmaster went abroad,' I ventured, minding what he said
himself. 'He did,' said he, 'and died there.' . . . That was all, but
that did me, my lord! I kent now that the North had a different tale
about Drimdorran's end from shire Argyle. And that itself is mighty
queer, my lord."

“My own authority," said Forbes, “was Islay. He had a most explicit
story of the drowning, though I sometimes used to hear the other
rumoured."

“Lord Islay there had just the same tale as the rest of us; it came from
Inverness, but I'll believe it only when I meet a man who saw the corpse
of Paul Macmaster!"

The Advocate got up and snapped his watch. “I think I have you now,"
said he, and blinked his eyes. “At any time you honour me by calling, it
is always something else than the pretended business in hand that you
are after. I fear you find the Advocate an easy fish to play." He
chuckled, caught the other by the arm and gently shook it. “Not this
time, Mr Campbell! Not this time! Drumly waters, but I'm off the feed!
I'm lucky this time that I got you to the point with less than usual of
a circuit journey. The long and the short of it is that you are more
concerned with this meare's nest about Macmaster than your proper
business, which, I take it, is to find out things concerning guns, and
other solid obstacles to law and order. You thought to rouse my interest
and get my egging-on in this ridiculous new hunt of yours for dead men's
bones, but mind this, Mr Campbell, I'm not in it! And you'll be wiser,
far, to limit your official zeal in Inverness to what my lord duke and
his brother sent you North for."

“Very good, my lord!" said Ninian, no way hearty in his acquiescence,
and the other laughed.

“You rogue!" said he. “I see you're looking wry. You'll do what suits
yoursel', I fancy, but there's this I'll warn you of—gang warily in
Inverness if you're for stirring stagnant waters. . . . Now then, Mr
Campbell, there's my gentry bellowing; come in and have your chack."

But Ninian excused himself on finding half a dozen boon companions of
the lawyer were the makers of the din that burst at times in peals of
laughter and of disputations cries from Forbes' dining-room; he pleaded
an engagement with his friend for dinner at their inn, and took his
leave, confirmed in his impression that retreat was best from joviality
for once, on finding in the hall a servant tilting up another claret
cask upon the gantry.




CHAPTER XV.

THE DEN.


He walked out from the garden leisurely, the Advocate requesting him
upon the doorstep to be sure and call again before he left the country.
“I sist ye to compear!" cried Forbes, and waved a hand. This leisured
step was kept until the house was hid by trees, and then his pace was
quickened. Quicker still it grew until the road passed through secluded
banks of shrub, and there he fairly ran jog-trot as if to catch a ferry.
For nigh a mile he kept at this peculiar gait for one that wore a
flapping coat and Saxon hat, and only when he came to fields where folks
were toiling put his heels to ground.

When he got to the town his sweat was lashing. Æneas was not come back
yet to the inn.

“You'll tell my friend," said Ninian to the landlord, “that I couldna
wait for meat at this time. Business, Mr Fraser, business! And you'll
say this to him—and mind the way I put it!—'Mr Campbell's compliments,
and he was called into the country where the primrose grows.' You'll not
forget that, Mr Fraser?—'Where the primrose grows.' Just a bit joke
between us; he'll understand."

Ten minutes later he was on a horse hired from a stable round the
corner, crossed the river, and rode landwards west. He trotted for an
hour, and then came wooded country with a big black ancient castle
scowling on a hill, and over it the hoodie-crows loud-clangouring. The
frith itself was narrowed here so much, it looked as if a tall-sparred
ship that floated near its head was high and dry incongruously in
meadows. Fertile fields were widely spread, and here and there dark
patches of the pine; high mounts were to the north, the greatest of them
broadly-shouldered Wyviss Ben. And everywhere about were smoking houses;
everywhere the braes were populous with folk. The high black castle keep
with girning crenels looked the master of the mountain and the plain and
all therein,—command was in the very reek of it; a king might well be
dwelling there.

“It's I like not the look of thee!" said Ninian sourly.

A man with a bare-polled head was in a park beside the road and he was
cutting rushes. Ninian stopped his horse and put a question.

“To whom, my lad," said he, “belongs this gallant castle?" though he
knew right well the place was Lovat's.

“To whom but to the great MacShimi," said the polled one, using Lovat's
patronym.

“That's what I was thinking to myself!" said Ninian. “My soul! but she's
the stately one!"

“The like of her is not in Albyn!" said the man, with vanity. “No shadow
of a thing that would be for the use of castles will be wanting—even to
a herdsman for the geese. Meat of each meat on the board; the barrels of
the wine of France as plentiful as nuts; a hundred servants. Great's the
man, MacShimi!" And he stood, not like a stot, himself, but like a
gentleman, although the shirt of him was all in holes; his head
uplifted, hands upon his haunches, whistling soft to show he was at
ease.

“Is he at home, Himself?" asked Ninian; “I'd give a cry on him."

“He went this morning to Strath Errick," said the man, and Ninian looked
disappointed.

“With any luck at all he'll have a wife?"

“I'll warrant ye! He's never out of them, MacShimi! A Campbellach of
Erraghaidheal, a twig of old MacCailein's; money would be with her, you
be sure. She's yonder since she came last year a wife to him, and seldom
do we see her. They're saying she is heavy."

“An galar bu mhiosa!—worst of all diseases!" Ninian said. “Sorrow
that that girl should have it, and the world already hotching-full of
Frasers!"

He took another turn at riding, passed through shrubbery and garden
trees, and round one big old oak with chains hung from its thickest
member, chinking in the wind, that on the brae-face here was blowing
gusty with the salt scent of the distant sea. He did not like the look
of those black chains a bit! He never had been there before; the place
astonished. It looked more like a fortress than a home, with studded
gates about the cobbled yard, and mounted cannons, turrets cloaked with
ivy in the which were peering little holes that one might doubt were
really meant for windows. In view about the house was not one flower. No
sooner had he struck the cobbles than the place seemed swarming like a
hive: at least a hundred men revealed themselves from every inlet to the
yard, and six came lounging up to hold his horse.

“I want to see her leddyship," he said in English, lordlily; “ye'll tell
her I have letters."

A gaunt old woman came and led him in and up a stair so steeply pitched
and dark he stumbled on it; dungeon airs were manifest—he sniffed them,
damp and mouldy; once or twice he put his hand behind his back and felt
the poignard.

The gaunt wife pushed a door and gave him entrance to a small, dark,
deadly-silent room with hangings and a bed, and there beside a window
twelve feet thick in wall he found a lonely woman. She sat upon a stool,
and she was sewing, and her thimble wet with tears. Her face was white
as one night's snow, and she had great big melting eyes as if with
constant staring out for grief. As he stepped in and shut the door
behind him she got up and cried.

“Ninian! Ninian! Ninian Campbell!" was her cry. “Oh, Ninian, have ye
come to see me?" and thereupon burst out in tears. She took his hand in
both of hers and stood a little, fondling it and speechless.

“Oh, m'eudail!" he said, greatly stricken, “is this the way of it with
you, my leddy?"

“Did you come here to take me home?" she asked then, eager, holding
still his hand, her big eyes filled with hope.

“Indeed and I would like that fine!" he said, with a pretence at
cheerfulness, “but when your leddyship comes back to yon place yonder
that's your home, it'll not be with a poor wee man of no account at all
like Ninian Campbell, but a tail of noble gentlemen. And I can tell you
that will be the splendid day for sheriffdom Argyll!"

“No, no!" she said with bitterness, “he'll put me in Kirkhill among the
rest; he would not even take me home for burial."

“Burial, my leddy! burial!" said Ninian, with impatience, “I wouldna
fash my mind wi' burials; it's not the thing at all, and us so young!"
His eye fell on two books on edge upon a little table—Baxter's
'Everlasting Rest' and Sibbe's 'Believers' Bowels Opened.'

“Ach!" he said, “you have been reading Sibbe; no wonder that you're
downed! Far better wi' a book of songs!"

She put him in a chair, and sat down on her bed, and dried her eyes, and
never after shed another tear.

“Oh, Ninian!" she said, “I'm glad to see you. What was it brought you
here? And how is my dear Jennet?"

“The thing that brought me North," said he, and started feeling in his
pockets, “is some business of your cousins' that's of no account at all.
But seeing I was coming here, my daughter asked me to be sure and call,
and sent your leddyship a letter. Stop a wee, and I will get it!"

“You must not call me Lady, Ninian; when I was happy I was Primrose
Campbell. Be quick, and get my letter! What was Jennet thinking of that
never wrote her friend till this? I wrote her twice and never got a
scrape of answer. And she my own dear friend!"

“Now that is strange!" said Ninian, and stopped his searching,
staggered. “My lass wrote twice to you, and never got a word. There's
surely some miscarriage!"

“I might be sure of it!" exclaimed the Lady Lovat, biting at her lip.
“Now I can understand a lot of things that troubled me. But haste ye,
Ninian! give me Jennet's letter."

He felt again his pockets carefully, and showed a great concern.

“Is that not most deplorable!" cried he at last; “I havena got it!"

“Oh!" she cried, and wrung her hands; “and you will fail me too!"

He shook his fist. “In all of Albyn there is not a man more stupid or
more vexed! Where's your letter but in Buachaille Etive, in an inn I
changed my clothes in. And I was thinking all the time I had it in this
pocket!"

She chided him, not harshly—half in smiles, a little woebegone, like
one too well acquaint with disappointments to lament one more. “At
least," said she, “it's always something just to know that Jennet has
not quite forgot me, and to see a face from home."

“There is a wise old word," said Ninian, “that will be saying 'Men may
meet, but never the mountains!' and it is a very strong true word."

“I do not understand it," said the lady.

“I daresay not, my lady Primrose—no, I daresay not! In faith, it sounds
a little flat in English, but in the Gaelic it will break men's hearts
to hear. I canna put it plainer in the English, but it means that old
friends meeting in a foreign land will vex themselves to think the
mountains of their home so distant. We canna shift the hills, my dear,
my dear! or if we could, a man I ken would bring upon his back to you
although his legs would break, Dunchuach! and what is that man's name
but Ninian Campbell!"

“Ah!" she said, and turned a ring upon her finger—“Dunchuach! . . . And
Glen Aray, and the woods! There was a lass among them, one time, Ninian,
was happy. Many a time I wonder if it could be me. No, no! it wasna me!
She died, that lass. . . . She was a little wee bit thing and wore a
yellow coat, and played wi' Jennet Campbell."

“There's not a printed book on earth that's worse than Sibbe!" said
Ninian with conviction, rising up and looking from the little window. He
could not see a thing.

At last he turned about and touched her shoulder. “I'm sorry that I have
to ask you this," he said,—“it's dreadful low and common in the
English; tell me this—Is your man bad to you?"

“And what if he was?" said she, still twisting at her ring.

“What if he was!" cried Ninian ferociously, the crinkle on his face. “My
God, mem! is there not the cry of 'Cruachan!'"

“A far cry to Lochow!" said she, “and farther still to kin. The thing's
beyond redemption, Ninian; tell me about Jennet."

“Jennet can wait!" He stood before her, catching at her hand. “A man,"
said he, “would need to have a breast of stone to look at you and see
you sitting there your lone in this bit closet stitching—you the
daughter of Mamore, MacCailein's brother. You might as well be in the
jyle! Put on your plaid, my dear, this minute, and I'll take you, though
I had to burst through rocks!"

She made a wan attempt at smiling. “What would Simon Lovat say to that?"
says she.

“——Or I would take a word down yonder," he went on more eagerly, “and
bring the clan. I do not like the colour of this country—not one bit!
I'm thinking to myself it would be fine for burning! And what is more, I
do not like the colour of your face, Prim Campbell—you were like the
flower, and now you're like the cannoch. If your folk thought you
suffered they would come here like a fire in heather, and burn out the
very roots of Castle Dounie."

“Ah, no!" said she at that; “the roots of it are deep, deep—deep—and
many a hole between them like the beeches of Strongarbh."

“Indeed I thought she had a dungeon smell! I like her not, your married
home. Prim Campbell! You have wrongs—what are they?"

She sat upon the bed, with folded arms, and clicked her heels—a sound
most desolate! “I ken the tune of them," said she, “but I do not ken the
words. There are no words."

“Well, lilt them to me, then!" he whispered. “Just the least bit
whistle."

“Sit down," she said, “and crack. I'll neither sing nor whistle. A bird
was in the breast of me a year ago, and now it's dead. And what would be
the good in any case? The thing's beyond remede."

For half an hour she kept him plied with questions, drinking up his news
like wine until her face had colour, and her heart got almost gay.
Ninian was deep in some droll story of some folk she knew when suddenly
he saw her pale.

“I hear a cantering," said she. He listened, hearing nothing but the
crows.

And then there was a shout outside, a sound of scurrying feet, the
clattering of horses.

“That's his lordship back," said she; “I hoped he would be later. And
there's an end to merriment—the happiest hour since I was Primrose
Campbell! . . . Make Jennet write me soon—and not by Lovat's runners
next time. You'll have to see him."

“Very good!" said Ninian, twitching at his coat-tails.

“I dare not ask you back!"

“I'll maybe ask mysel'. There's one or two bit things to talk of
still——"

“Prim! are ye there?" cried out a voice upon the stairs. “I'm coming
up!"

“Take not a bite from him though you were starving, Ninian!" she
whispered.

“Indeed and I'm not needing it," he answered. “I had my own good dinner
at the inns, and I did nobly."

“Are ye there. Prim? Can ye no' answer me?" Lord Lovat cried again upon
the threshold, fumbling at the handle of the door.

“God bless me! Ninian Campbell! Is that you, yourself?" he cried when he
beheld his wife's companion. “What mischief are ye after? I never saw ye
in my country yet but ye were at your tricks!"

He looked a man of sixty, portly in the form, and bellied, with a great
thick neck, and knots upon his forehead, little slits of eyes with
wrinkles round them, and a broad cajoling smile. He wore the Highland
dress, with trews so tightly cut they showed his legs were bowly.

“Ah!" said Ninian, chuckling, “your lordship's just in time! Her
leddyship and me was nearly off together."

“I'm not afraid of that a bit!" said Lovat, leering at her. “Primrose
would not leave her Simon." He tweaked her ear and put an arm about her.
He might have been her father. She stood as stiff's a crag, and like a
tomb for coldness. Ninian's shoulders itched.

“Come away down, the three of us, and have a bite," said Lovat briskly.
“How's my lord his Grace, and how's his brother Islay? Have ye letters
for me?"

“The only one I had," said Ninian, with shame, “was for her leddyship,
and I'm a stupid man that went and lost it. I had to leave some clothes
at Buachaille Etive, and just this moment I found out I left my Jennet's
line in them."

“Hoots!" said Lovat, “you are getting old! Never put a letter in your
pocket; put it next the skin."

The three of them were standing on the floor; they made the small
apartment crowded. “Take you a seat, my dear," said Lovat to his wife,
and she sat down again upon her bed, and clicked her heels, and turned
her ring, and looked at things invisible.

“Ye havena told me yet what mischief ye are after," Lovat said again to
Ninian.

“I'll tell ye that, my lord," said Ninian, frank as day. “There's loud
complaint of damage to the Road by banded parties; there's a lot of
trouble wi' the Watches—some of them are out for plunder; and there's
trafficking in arms. Your friend the Duke has sent me up to take a look
about me."

“Did he ask ye to come here to see me first of all?" said Lovat quickly,
taking out a pipe.

“Well, no," said Ninian, “your lordship wasna mentioned. His Grace and
Islay are from home; my orders came through Mr Duncanson."

“Duncanson might have the sense to send you straight to me," said Lovat,
querulous, and started polishing his pipe upon his nose. “The Duke, my
kinsman, has the proofs of my devotion to himself and to the Government
in spite of that it took from me my corps, and then my sheriffship. It
must be well kent to you, Mr Campbell, that there is not a gentleman in
the North has better means of knowing what is stirring than myself. If
you had come one errand's end to me, I could have told you all about
affairs and saved you trouble prying. There's not a move among the
Jacobites, if that's what my good friends are thinking. It has been a
capital year for crops; the lairds and chiefs are rife of money; all the
wildest clans have been disarmed——"

“I'm not so sure of that, my lord," said Ninian. “I doubt they're giving
up old gear at bonny prices just to buy them better, new. They're
landing shiploads in the Forth; if they're no' meant for serious use I'm
cheated."

Lovat gave a crackling laugh, deep down his thrapple.

“Nonsense, man!" he said, “I don't believe one word of it! The one who
told you that was trying to make a mock of you. It wasna Forbes now, was
it?"

“At any rate that's MacCailein's notion," said Ninian lightly.

“And as for trouble on the Road, ye canna wonder at it—what's the good
of roads for folk brought up on heather? The Road's no pet of mine."

“Nor mine," said Ninian heartily. “I think it spoils the country. But
that is not MacCailein's notion."

“If my Highland company had not been disbanded, by what influence at the
Court I'll fathom yet—it couldna be my age, whatever o't; I still could
lead the lads—there would have been no trouble on the Road, for I
myself would see to it. That land of Badenoch wants the strong firm
hand."

“Indeed it does, my lord!" said Ninian. “I had my bellyful of trouble
getting through it this time."

“Had ye that!" said Lovat, rubbing with his hand upon his pipe. “It was
not Col, now, was it?" he inquired in Gaelic.

“No other one!" said Ninian, reddening for the wife, and on him, there
and then, came down a cloud.

“That's the damnedst rogue in Gaeldom!" Lovat cried, and cracked his
pipe. He threw its parts upon the floor, and ground them with his heel.
“That's what I would do," says he, “with Barisdale!" His face was
purple.

“Did I not think," said Ninian, “he was your lordship's friend?"

“Friend!" cried Lovat, choking. “If I will get him in Strathglass again
at his old capers with my cattle, I will show the kind of friendship!"

“Well, faith," said Ninian, “he has the turn of telling with great glee
what ploys he used to have in Castle Dounie."

“He has not set his foot within my door for years. The man's in fear of
death of me! What ploys, now, was he telling?"

“Oh, just a lot of bὸilich—that is bombast in the English, Lady
Lovat—the only thing I mind is that he had a bout of foils with Paul
Macmaster here. He said he beat him."

Lovat snorted. “Beat Macmaster, did he! He's a liar! There was no better
fencer in the country than Drimdorran, and he beat Col level though he
had a wounded arm. Col couldna hold a candle to him!"

“That's what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian, very slowly. “Her
leddyship, I'm sure, is tired of listening to my nonsense. I'll be
better stepping," He shook her by the hand. “Before I leave the North,"
said he, “I'll get my daughter's letter, and come out with it myself."

“Be sure you do," said she.

“But you must have refreshment, Mr Campbell," Lovat briskly said again.
“Come down the stair, the three of us; I havena had a morsel since the
morning."

He led the way, expecting them to follow: Ninian glanced at Lady Lovat,
and she shook her head. He groped his way downstairs behind her husband,
sniffing.

“Is Prim no' coming?" said her husband at the foot. “Well, let her
bide!" He gave the crackled laugh and peered at Ninian. “I'm thinking
she's on her high horse the day, Ninian; you and me will just take
pot-luck together. What did ye think of her ladyship, Ninian? She's an
old crony of yours?"

“I didna get much chance to speak to her," said Ninian, “but I thought
her just a little downed, with reading Sibbe's 'Bowels.'"

“That's just it!" said Lovat, crackling. “Far better wi' the wanton
plays of Wycherley! But ye see yoursel'——" He pursed his lips and with
a droll expression whistled the ground of a pibroch called “Too long in
this condition."

“I see, my lord!" said Ninian; “I see!" his gaze between two buttons on
Lord Lovat's coat.

“What the devil are ye looking at like that?" cried Lovat, stepping
back.

“I was just thinking to myself I never saw a bonnier tartan coat," said
Ninian, and passed his tongue across his lips.




CHAPTER XVI.

DEAD MEN'S BONES.


A great commotion in the street at ten o'clock that night brought out
young Æneas from the inn with some alarm lest Ninian should be involved.
A Highlander from France was the occasion—he had raked the market in
the morning for recruits, got seven likely fellows, kept them primed
with spirits in a tavern, and waited for the dark, to march them to a
boat. His sheep had friends who pounced on them when they appeared from
out the tavern; there was a squabble; some one fired a gun; a guard of
redcoats hurried out and took the Gael of France a prisoner.

For half an hour the street was in a turmoil; then, as in a
thunder-plump, the folk ran back into their closes; silence, like a
swound, came on the burgh. Æneas saw it like a picture, felt it like a
song—the whitewashed mason fronts, the surly-looking entries of the
lands, high-arched, the glimmer of a window here and there extinguished
at a puff, and over all the quiver of the stars. He nursed within his
breast a sense of eerieness and wonder.

When he got round the corner to his inn, his friend was standing at the
door.

“I thought you had got lost," said Æneas.

“Night, the good herdsman, brings all creatures home," said Ninian. “A
bonny night, indeed! let you and me just take a little turn before we
seek the blankets."

They walked the river-side, and Æneas recounted his first steps in
business with something of a gusto. Haggling over freights and
fish-crops, with Mackay to help him, was, it seemed, to have some spice
of fun in it.

“And did ye give Mackay yon money?" Ninian asked.

“He wouldn't take it! He never saw such money in his life before, and he
was frightened."

“Frightened, was he? Well, it's not a wonder; I would be in fright
myself to have so much about me, and the world so wide for spending. You
be sure and watch your pockets! Did yon man Fraser at the inns convey my
message?"

“He did," said Æneas.

“And did ye get my drift?"

“Primrose Campbell;—you were out at Lovat's——"

“Well done, yourself!" cried Ninian heartily. “Ye're getting to your
schooling, I'll assure ye! I didna want the Fraser one to know where I
was going. If there's a clan in Gaeldom worth the watching it's the
Frasers."

“I fancy they are just like other folk," said Æneas, “good and bad among
them."

“I never liked them from the start, and neither did my father, and now
I'm under vows against them. But never you mind that the now! The way
I'm taking you this walk is not for health, for I can tell ye I was
plenty on my feet this day. There's things I have to say to ye that
couldna well be said in Fraser's inns with lugs about us. Far better on
the mountain-top!"

“I must confess I was surprised to think of you at Lovat's. What
business had you there?" said Æneas.

“None at all that he kent of, and that's the truth for ye! I had to tell
a bonny lie for an excuse, about a letter to his wife from Jennet. Never
was a lie so sticky in my throat before!"

“I can't see what you wanted there at all," said Æneas; “my uncle says
the man's a brock."

“The brock's a gentleman compared to Sim!" said Ninian. “But I'm the dog
to draw the badger! The way to get a brock is not to stand and whistle
at a cairn; I had to see him. If you will just stop talking your
nonsense about the Frasers being like other folk, I'll tell ye what I
did. First and foremost, I went out to Duncan Forbes, a man as deep's a
well and clean as crystal. Ye'll know yourself that Duncan is the one
man in the North that's worth a spittle. What Duncan does not know is
not worth kenning. Now ye'll be wondering to yourself what brought me
there in such a hurry?"

“I can't say that I am," said Æneas.

“Fie on ye there!" said Ninian. “Always, you, be curious; that's the way
to learn. Myself I couldna see a man go up a close but I would wonder
what he wanted there. I went to Forbes for three things—first, because
I had to, for Lord Islay bade me. Man, yon's the clever, deep one,
Duncan! He should have been a beachdair! There's nothing that I
learned this week back that he doesna know already, but he never guessed
before what meant the trade in guns. I think I pleased his lordship
there!—oh yes, I pleased him; out at once he brought the bottle! But
that was not the only thing that sent me yonder; that could wait: the
second thing was more important,—I wanted him to know that I was here,
and give him just the least wee hint that I might beard the badger. If I
by any chance fell down a stair in Castle Dounie, it would be some
comfort just to ken that Duncan might come looking. Do ye think I would
go into the den without letting my friends ken? Na, na! And that's the
very reason I left word for you about the primrose."

“I guessed so much myself," said Æneas.

“Of course ye did! Ye must have heard of Simon's dungeons. I felt the
smell of them! Well, I came back from Forbes, and got a horse, and
galloped off, and——"

“But what about the third thing took you out to Forbes?" asked Æneas.

Ninian nodded. “Good!" said he. “I wondered would ye mind to ask. Oh
yes, ye're getting on! But never mind the third thing now—just come
with me to Lovat. I feared at first I wouldna see him; he was at Strath
Errick." He stopped, and stood, and whispered low to Æneas, “Did ever ye
see Primrose Campbell?"

“No," said Æneas.

“It was my wife gave milk to her. She's just the age of Jennet. Many a
day they played about Glen Aray. You'll no' can mind of that; it was
before your memory came to you. She was as bonny as a trout! What woe
has come upon that girl? Yonder she was sitting like a ghost, and
greeting. Never was there seen a drearier girl! Her room was like a cell
for darkness and for size, and in it was a girnal, and a skellet at the
grate for cooking. What can ye make of that but that she feeds alone?
Duke Archie's niece, you'll mind ye! daughter of Mamore!"

He put his hand behind his neck, and gave a tug, and brought his dagger
out, and held it level in both palms as one would show a fish.

“Bheil thu faicinn sin?" said he—“Ar't seeing that? I never had a
flea on me that bit my back the way that biodag did when I was
standing there with Simon and the girl he spoiled. He put an arm about
her; he was like a falcon with a heath-hen in its claws; I picked the
very spot where I could strike him just between the buttons."

He was inflamed with anger; cried loud out, all trembling.

“Cuist! for God's sake!" Æneas whispered, looking round about him.
“This is not the moor; you never know who's listening."

“That is very true," said Ninian, and looked about him too. No house was
near. The place they stood on was a haugh where clothes were bleaching.
The wind of night was blowing. He slipped the dagger down his back again
and more composedly resumed his tale.

“It's not the first time I met Sim: I got the size of him one time
before when I was North on business, and this time, like that last, he
started out to draw me."

“And little he got out of you, I'll swear," said Æneas with amusement.

“Now there ye're wrong! I told him just the truth—to baffle him. When
you will have a rogue to deal with, Æneas, in your business, always tell
the truth,—it foils the other fellow. All the time Sim fiddled with his
pipe, and rubbed it on his nose to hide the mouth of him, and I kept
half an eye on him. He knew as much as Forbes, and blamed me that I did
not come to him the first go-off for information. 'They took my Highland
corps from me,' says he, 'but my good friend the Duke knows that I'm
staunch and steady.' 'Ye damned old rogue!' thinks I, and aye as cheery
as the morn with him, although that poor lass sitting on her bed fair
made me think him stinking. 'Ye rogue!' thinks I, 'stop you, and I will
have ye!' And then, my grief, I got a blow! Ye see, Æneas, just to tell
ye the truth plump and plain, since ever we met Barisdale, and yon black
lad who had the creach made mention of some Big One checking me, my
mind would aye be running on Lord Lovat. He doesna like the Road; he's
just the man to turn a penny troking with the Dutch for guns, and he's
the only man I know that might in some way get a word that I was
coming."

“Who could tell him that?" asked Æneas.

“That's the bit! I never yet came North but Lovat knew my business.
Indeed, that was another reason for my telling him the truth this day;
he maybe knew't already. Well, at the last, yonder, I thought I had him,
and then, mo thruaigh! I got the blow. Ye see I mentioned last of all
that I had trouble coming, and thereupon says he, quite sharp in Gaelic,
though his wife was there who does not know, poor soul! the language,
'Was it Col?' That fairly downed me!"

“It looks to me," said Æneas, “a very foolish question for a man so
sharp as Lovat. To my mind it proclaimed him guilty, or at any rate with
knowledge."

“There ye go again! Just think a wee, my lad!—if he had been the Big
One in command of Col, he never would have breathed Col's name. Whenever
he said that, I knew my twine was twisted just as bad as ever. I went
there sure he had put Col on me, and the man who put Col on me was the
man who trafficked in the guns, and the man who trafficked in the guns
was the man who egged the ragged remnants of the clans to break the
Road, and whenever he said 'Was it Col?' I felt a fool."

“But craft for craft!" said Æneas; “if Lord Lovat's quite so cunning a
man as all that, might his question not be made so purposely simple just
to blind you?"

“Not a bad observe!" said Ninian, with approval. “It might well be that
Simon tried the truth too, just to blind me. But na, na! It turns out
Barisdale and he for years have been at variance about some pranks of
Col with cattle in Strathglass. 'I'll break him like my pipe!' says Sim
in fury, and he smashed it with his heel. I thought, at last, like you,
there was a chance that all this was put on, so out went Ninian, and
took three farm-town dinners, and spent three hours in questioning the
country. There's no doubt about it—he could cut Col's throat! Col is in
fear of death of him; he has a mortgage over Col's estate, and plays him
like a fish. So there, ye see, I'm all aback, and have to start some
other way to loose my hank. And Duncan Forbes is on the wrong scent
too,—although he never cheeped, I knew he thought the same as I did."

“Well, that clears Lovat, seemingly," said Æneas.

“Of that, perhaps! Of that!" said Ninian. “But I have other things to
settle with his lordship. He piped a bit of a tune to me—'Too long in
this condition'—By God! I'll make him pipe before I'm done with him, or
my name's not Macgregor. Oh, Æneas! if you had seen—if you had heard
yon woman! Brock! brock! Give me his head on a stick! He wanted me to
stay for meat—a bite of it would choke me! I had a task of it refusing
in a way to shield his wife, but I managed. Now here's a thing will make
ye wonder—I'm going back to Castle Dounie."

“I wouldn't go!" said Æneas.

“Ye see, I promised Prim to find my daughter's letter and to take it out
to her. It's ill to find a thing that never was, and I'll no find it, so
I'll just go out and say so. Although that lie stuck in the throat of
me, I'm not ashamed o't: I can use it twice to some advantage. If ever
you have need to tell a lie, be sure it is a good one, Æneas."

“I wouldn't go," said Æneas again, “I wouldn't go!"

“What! Not for that poor woman's sake! Is that the man ye are,
Macmaster? Just think of her—the old MacCailein's niece, to grow up
like the rush on Aray-side and wither like the fern in yon black cranny
of the brock!"

“Can she not leave it?"

“Not of herself, nor of her own contrivance. Ye wouldna ask the question
if ye knew Prim Campbell—she was like the kings for pride! Her man
might hang her by the nails, and she would not give one wee cry to show
the world she suffered. She would not even tell myself what ailed her at
the brute. And what am I to say to Jennet—that I left her old friend
yonder in the falcon's claws?"

“No, no! you can't do that!" said Æneas, greatly shaken. “I see it now;
you must go out and plead with her to leave him if it be so bad as you
are thinking. I'll go myself with you, if that is any use."

“That's what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian, and clapped the
other's back. “It's this way of it, Æneas,—I want your backing-up about
her state when I get back to Inveraray, and, forbye, I want ye just to
have a squint at Simon."

“That bit of it I know I'll scarcely relish," Æneas said wryly.

“I daresay not, but ye can help me greatly just by giving him the
squint. Between us, if we canna get Prim Campbell to give up her man,
we'll maybe get a way to take her man from Primrose Campbell. Come you
down this way just a bittock, lad, before we turn. I'm like the man of
Knapdale—I'm not finished with my story."

They now were well out of the town, and opposite the river's isles
whence came above the rushing of the stream the whistling of whaups. It
seemed the voice of terrified conspiracies to Æneas. The plumage of the
isles was black against the stars; no whisper of the town, nor any light
of it, came where they walked through dewy grasses. A goat at tether on
the rough bank bleated. Ninian went off the path a bit, and came upon a
bridge of wood that led out to the islands. He stood upon the middle of
it with his friend.

“Did ever you hear," said he, “of the fox and the fleas?"

“No," said Æneas, wondering.

“When the fox is bad with fleas, he will take a piece of moss into the
mouth of him and wade very slowly out in a river just like this, and the
fleas will come up to his back to keep themselves from drowning. Then
the sly fellow will go deeper in, until they have to take his neck for
it. Then he will sink his head below the water, all except his mouth,
and it will have the piece of moss in it. The fleas will all take refuge
in the moss, like many a gallant tribe in history, and then the red lad
lets the moss go floating."

“Very good for a preamble," said Æneas, leaning on the bridge below
which went the black Ness rushing. “What is the application?"

“That is a story of my father's; he was a great hand at the stories, and
now lies yonder in Balwhidder, all his stories done. He would say to me,
'If I could get a piece of moss was big enough to hold the Frasers, I
would walk through Conyvreckan with them hanging on my back. But I'm
thinking Simon would be an ill beast to shake off the snout! When I went
out to-day to Castle Dounie, it was with no particular ill-will to
Simon, for he himself's MacCailein's kin, and he was married on Prim
Campbell. With that I couldna very well be hard on him; I even might
have smoothed things over just to please his leddy, unless they were the
blackest. But when I saw yon weeping woman of my heart, the marrow of my
bones was poisoned at him. I couldna spare him then! Na, na! I couldna
spare him then! The very dirk of me was kittling my back and crying
'Kill him!'"

“You're just a savage, Ninian," said Æneas, with pity.

“Am I? God be praised, if that's to kill a rat! Ye thought he was clear
of me, did ye, when I proved him an unfriend of Col's? But I had
something else against him, maybe worse than trafficking in guns. Many a
left-hand business Sim was mixed in. Ye know the way he got his first
wife? He took with him five hundred men and carried her away to Aigas
Island, where he kept her in a creel and got a drunken minister to marry
them. He was condemned to death for that, and lived for years a hunted
man, with Atholl for the worst dog on his trail. MacCailein got him
pardoned, and ever since he plays the loyal chief. He took his clan out
for King Geordie in the year of Mar, and they were out again against
your father at Glenshiel. Are ye grasping this?—at no time was he on
the side of Paul Macmaster!"

“I'm glad to know it!" said Æneas warmly.

“But listen you to this—I told ye on Loch Laggan-side your father had
been drowned: there's not one word of truth in it! Nor was he killed at
all in Ross-shire."

“What happened to him, then?" asked Æneas, bewildered.

“If Ninian could tell ye that he would be clever! When I told ye yon
story at Loch Laggan of your father drowned I just was sounding ye. Your
family might have a different account of him and kept it to themselves.
I found ye knew as little as myself, or less. Whatever happened to your
father, it was neither in the battle nor the boat he perished."

“I know that he was wounded in the fight," said Æneas.

“That's true; he was. But after it he was in Castle Dounie, and was
fencing there with Col. Ye mind Col told us?"

“But I thought that was sometime earlier," said Æneas with agitation.
“Oh, I wish these birds would stop their whistling!"

“Never you mind the birds! They are like all of us, and have their own
affairs of night-time. It's me that likes to hear the curlew call!
Listen now, to me!"

He told him much the same as he had told to Forbes, of Barisdale's
equivocations when he questioned him alone.

“And what does Forbes think of it?" asked Æneas.

“Nobody will ever know what Duncan Forbes is thinking about anything,
least of all a beachdair. But I saw from the face of him he was in bad
weather when I brought up your father's end and mentioned Castle Dounie.
Ye see, Æneas, Forbes and Lovat are friends—at least, as close on that
as a dove might be with a serpent, though, 'faith, there's no' much o'
the dove in Duncan when it comes to the hour of battle. Like all good
men, he's loth to think his neighbour worse than he suspected, and you
and me will get no help from him in prying into this thing."

“But here's a thing that—if I'm to take your view of it—imputes some
dark and sinister connection between my father's disappearance and Lord
Lovat: is the Lord Advocate not a man to do his duty to the State——?"

“Stop! stop!" cried Ninian. “Forbes, ye may be sure, will do his duty
when it's plain before him, but like the rest of us, he's no' going to
break his legs running after it if it means the ruin of an old
acquaintance. Time enough for him to think of duty when the story's full
before him. Just now he doesna credit me!"

“And what am I to do?" asked Æneas helplessly.

“We'll go out to Castle Dounie together in two or three days—just time
enough for me not to be able to find yon letter. For one thing, ye will
bear me witness that his wife's in misery. We'll make a point to see his
lordship, and what more natural than that your father's name should call
for mention either by Lord Lovat, or myself, or you? We've just to start
the crack about Col's story; you be very calm, and I'll keep watch on
Simon."

“It is a terrible task you give me," Æneas said gloomily; “it is like
digging up my father's bones. And what do you think will come of it?"

“I canna tell ye that," said Ninian, turning from the bridge and making
for the sleeping town, “but this I'm sure of,—something happened to
your father far more strange than drowning."




CHAPTER XVII.

CASTLE DOUNIE AGAIN.


For three days more did Æneas prosecute his uncle's business; then a
thing befell that cut all business short and proved that Ninian was
right in thinking Inverness more wicked than the woods. Mackay—a
sombre, pious, iron kind of man, who piqued himself upon his own
sufficiency—had been at first inclined to huff at having this young
sprig sent North to help him, and to pry into affairs, but found a
Highland way at last of turning Æneas's appearance to his own account.
He hinted to their customers of great new plans for wider markets with
the influence of Argyll; made out the lad a protégé of Islay's, and
ascribed to him a fabulous amount of what he called the “wherewithal."
His own importance thus fictitiously distended, he took Æneas down Loch
Ness, and through The Aird, the Black Isle, and the straths, the lad in
ignorance of what tales secured for him a deference he felt was out of
all proportions to his years. He met a score of men whose names were
known to him as chieftains on his uncle's books,—majestic creatures
holding state in gaunt old keeps where pipers blew from turrets, or in
shabby barn-like houses sucking life from clustered crofts about them.
It seemed at first to Æneas an insolence to mention business to such
lordly ones—they were so grandly clad in plaid and lace, such shining
buttons and such high-cocked feathers; sometimes had they tails of
henchmen, wet-foot gillies, armour-bearers, like a page of story. They
dealt with him, to start with, like a scullion, thinking him a Lowland
prentice to Mackay, but once Mackay had whispered to them something of
the truth (a good deal stretched), and Æneas, unabashed, confronted them
as lofty as themselves, they treated him with great civility.

From these proud petty chiefs he got his last illumination of the North
as glamoured mainly to the eye of fancy, and a gleam went off the hills
for him as slips the sunset off the heather. It was with some dismay, as
one finds river ice break under him, he found that just as Barisdale
below his leather coat was but a bellows, so these men of family, for
all their show of native ancient pomp and ritual, were more the
merchant-men than Alan-Iain-Alain Og. They haggled like to fishwives on
the price of salt and salmon crops, and pickled beef, and timber: when
one—a Major Fraser, laird of Castleheather—followed him for miles
along The Aird to canvass a fantastic scheme for cutting woods and
opening a furnace, Æneas told himself he nevermore would wear a kilt!

His dream dispelled of a poetic world surviving in the hills, he got
malicious and secret joy in stripping every rag of false heroics from
such gentry. From some one he had learned that Castleheather was no
friend of Lovat; that day in The Aird, as he came with him brandishing
his schemes for making money fast for Æneas (with of course a fat share
for himself), the young man, in a mood of mischief, ventured an opinion
that no Fraser schemes could flourish in that shire unless Lord Lovat
fathered them.

As he was saying so, they were in sight of Castle Dounie. “Look at it!"
hissed Fraser, boiling. “Tell me did ye ever see an uglier! It's like
the man himself; get you into the grip of Simon wi' your money, and
he'll squeeze ye like a lemon."

“I'm never hearing but the worst of him," said Æneas. “Surely he has
some parts not entirely vicious, or else he was no friend of Islay and
Argyll."

“They don't know him!" cried Castleheather, mad with fury. “Yes, by God,
they do!" he added quickly. “A man I kent sent proofs to them of what he
was,—a letter of Sim's own that showed he had a share in Grange's
business and trepanned the lady. They had it in good time to stop his
marriage with their niece, but na!—it didna stop it; knowing what they
knew, they let him take her! Lovat has put salt upon MacCailein's tail;
he'll never want a pleader now in London, seeing that he's married on a
Campbell."

“The thing's incredible of Islay or his Grace," said Æneas stoutly, yet
a little shaken in his loyalty, and thereupon the Major, like a man who
feared he had been too outspoken, half retracted, saying that at least
the thing was rumoured. “Do not breathe," said he, “a word of what I've
mentioned; I'm too ill-neighbours as it is with Sim to make things worse
by clattering."

Those three days Æneas spent with Saul Mackay brought down on him in
Inverness attentions that he could not understand: he never guessed the
pious Saul had magnified three hundred pounds into so many thousands.
The street folk sometimes jostled him to see if he would chink. A horde
of beggars followed him—in fishing-bothies, on the quays, among the
skippers, even in the shops. The inn that he and Ninian dwelt in had at
times a row in front of it of idle citizens who seemed to find some
satisfaction just to look at walls behind which all that wealth—to
judge by smell—was supping sheep's-head singed.

With beachdair business of his own that kept him less in Inverness
than in the landward parishes about it, where he spent from morn till
all hours of the night in seeming useless sauntering round mills and
smithies, hamlets, farm-towns, inns—any place at all in which he could
get folk to gossip,—Ninian knew nothing of his friend's celebrity till
one night he came home, himself, a good deal earlier than usual, and
from some casual talk among a group upon the causeway, grasped the
situation.

“They're talking of ye there as if ye had the wealth of India in your
belt," he said peevishly to Æneas when he got in. “Your man Mackay's a
fool—he has been bragging, or ye have been flourishing your uncle's
money far too free. It's something of a pity, lad, ye ever dropped the
kilt; they never would jalouse a man in kilts had more than sixpence.
Whatever o't, it's close on time that we were shifting home: if we were
only done wi' old MacShimi, I'm quite ready for the road, whatever you
may be."

“Have you come speed regarding yon!—a fresh light on the business?"
Æneas asked: through every hour—through every moment, almost, of his
mercantile engagements, that mystery of his father, like a wraith, stood
on the threshold of his mind. He knew that Ninian, like a hound, was
tracking, yet until that moment when MacShimi's name was mentioned he
had curiously forbore to question him, half-fearful that some wild
half-daft surmises of his own might be confirmed.

“Not so much a light as just an ember here and there," said Ninian, and
took a fishing-line, all tangled in a mass, from out his pocket. They
had a room between them, lit by tallow dips; he held the line up to a
candle so that Æneas could see how badly it was ravelled.

“That's your father's business," he said, his deep eyes glittering. “Ye
see it's gey and tousy—scarce an ell of it unfankled." He dived his
hand into another pocket, and produced a line rolled neatly on a stick,
with just some yards of tangled end to clear of it.

“That," said he, “is my own affair; I'll get what twists are left, from
that, before I'm two days older," and he put it back into his pouch.
“But this one here's a far more kittle task to deal wi'; now it's in a
knot wi' me I canna loose another finger-length until the two of us have
seen his lordship."

He pulled a chair up to the table, sat, and set the twine before him,
glowering at it like a man gripped in a spell. There seemed in him some
notion of the thing as more than symbol—as a mystery and problem in
itself; over and over he turned it lightly with a finger, muttering to
himself in Gaelic. Then he took his small black knife, and with its
point for bodkin gently pryed the ravelling.

“Tach!" said he at last, disgusted, and thrust it in his pocket. “What's
the use to-night? I needna bother. I've been on the busy foot all day
like the deer of the mountain ben, and not much gained from it; I'm
thinking to myself we'll better beard the brock to-morrow if your
business will permit."

Next afternoon they got a fisherman to take them on a favouring slant of
wind to Beauly village, and from there went out on foot to Castle
Dounie. A string of twenty horses stood at rings along a wall; and pipes
were bellowing. Gillies wearing other cloth than Fraser's hung about a
copper where a cook made soup, and with them was a slim, young, silly
lad in breeches with a bag the gillies took from him and tossed between
them till it burst and gushed out letters. The piper of the house, as
they came to the front of it, stopped playing, and threw down his pipes
upon the ground as if they soiled his hands, and they were picked up by
a man who seemed to wait on him for just that purpose.

“It looks to me," said Æneas, “as if we happened on a busy day."

“My loss! we have," said Ninian ruefully. “He's got a company," and then
his face lit up at sight of Lady Lovat standing at the door. She had
presided at her husband's table whence that moment burst the uproar of
his guests as if they were relieved at her departure when the serious
ritual of wine and Ferintosh came on. Before retiring to her cell she
had come to the door to breathe a moment's cleaner air than was within,
and gave a cry of pleasure at the sight of Ninian.

There was no more than time for Ninian to let her know the name of his
companion, when Lovat, who had heard her cry, came from the dinner-room
with great displays of warmth to ask them in.

“I'm feared ye're just a little late for dinner, gentlemen," said he,
and hiccoughed. “'Post festum ven—ven'—what is it
now?—'venisti.' But if ye're in trim for jinks, ye couldna have
picked out a better hour. . . . Ye're looking tired, Prim; go you and
lie ye down."

She left them like a child admonished; on that instant every doubt of
Æneas that kept his judgment in suspense about Lord Lovat's character
was gone—he hated him!

“My friend is Paul Macmaster's son," said Ninian. “He's here in
Inverness on business for his uncle, and I took him out wi' me to see
The Aird. We took a boat to Beauly and go back that way. The pity is I
havena got the least excuse for coming here except to tell her ladyship
I havena got her letter yet."

Lovat turned his gaze on Æneas and scanned him closely as he shook his
hand. “I'm glad to see ye, sir," said he, indifferent about the letter;
“I knew your father, as no doubt my friend here Mr Campbell would inform
ye. That was a gallant man! And now come you away and see my hoose." He
took them by the arms and led them, waddling a little in his gait; the
least faint flush of drink was on his face, a sappy kind of fulsomeness
was in his manner; he was blithe.

The place he pushed them into was a hall, oak-beamed, with a stupendous
fireplace on whose hearth two dozen tappit-hens were ranked like
soldiers, warming what was in them. The bottom of the table scarcely
could be seen for reek that drifted from tobacco-pipes; it had been
cleared of meats, and round it, closely packed, were sitting men at that
particular stage of human bliss, where not the trump of Gabriel itself
would matter. When Ninian and Æneas stepped in, the room was like to
rend with shouting that was slacked but for a moment while Lord Lovat
made his new guests known to half the company—the other half was too
far off among the smoke and too uproarious to take notice. “Sit ye
here," said he, and made a place beside him, Æneas next his elbow. A
servant-man in breeches clapped before them tappit-hens, the measures
full of claret or canary.

“Ca' canny wi' the drink!" said Ninian, whispering.

Æneas looked about him at a company of whose notables his host gave him
the names; at least a dozen of their number were small lairds himself
had met that week with Saul Mackay, who flourished with their glasses,
pledging him; but for the piper playing outside in the grounds again,
and Scottish speech and older roysterers, it might (he thought) be
Utrecht and the students.

For seeing Lovat play the patriarch the hour was not quite opportune;
his friends had lifted anchors and were driving free before the winds of
grape and barley. Repeated arguments boiled into wrangles round the
table; sometimes with a toast he stopped them, or would shoot a
pleasantry that kept his company in hand; he even ventured some
high-kilted tales. Himself a good deal soberer than the soberest of
them—as Æneas could see—he was at times a little clouded, his
crackling laugh more frequent than was called for by the fun; at times
he swayed a trifle on the bow legs when he stood. But always he
maintained the chieftain—formal in address when names were mentioned;
half his guests as “cousins," all the rest punctiliously by names of
their estates. No stratagem was wanting to maintain good-humour; he had
every wile! And always, as his eyes swept round them, that cajoling
smile!

The clamour made all rational speech impossible, and Æneas and Ninian,
too late, by hours, to reach that witless level, sat till they were
wearied, not a chance arising to bring up the topic of their call, until
at last, as Providence would have it, Lovat of himself gave them an
opening.

“Is this your first jaunt North?" he queried Æneas in a lull.

“Yes," said Æneas. “Till now I never crossed Druim Albyn. Your lordship
has a bonny land."

“There's nothing wrong with it in that respect, I pride myself," said
Lovat, just as if himself had been creator; “when I'm away from it,
young sir, it's many a time I'm thinking there's no finer in the
universe. A little out the world, but none the worse of that." He rubbed
a nutmeg on a risp above his wine and looked benignant. “Your father had
a fancy for it; he was taken, in particular, with The Aird."

“You knew him, sir?" said Æneas, with commotion in his breast.

“He spent a month wi' me—a worthy man! It was a mortal pity how things
fell! I could have told ye were his son, sir; there's a great
resemblance."

“So they say," said Æneas, uneasy at the old man's gaze that searched
his features with an eye in which a tear of sentiment was hanging.

“And still ye're like your mother too, in some way—it's the tilt-up of
your chin; I saw it at the door. I never met her, but he had her
picture."

“I've never seen it, sir," said Æneas, with interest.

“Oh yes, he had it with him—very fine! A little of the rebel too, to
look at, as he said himself."

A host of questions cried in Æneas; he turned to Ninian, to find he was
engaged in speech with some one on his other side.

“It was after Glenshiel that he was here, I think?" said Æneas at last.

“It was. That sorry business!" He looked about him cautiously; assured
the clamour of the table made it safe, he leaned to Æneas and whispered,
“Between ourselves, I risked a lot by harbouring your father that time.
My kindred were against him at Glenshiel, and yet I was myself suspected
to be friends with the Pretender—the damnedst nonsense, as my good
friend Ninian could tell ye! An old acquaintance of my own and of your
father's—Dugald Ross of Keills—came on him blooding like a wedder in
Glen Afric from a cut he got that morning in the skirmish; hid him for a
week, and brought him here in cloud of night for my protection. I mind
that evening well—your father made a dash into my room, and touched the
fire before I could prevent him, making sure of sanctuary. Ye know the
custom, Mr Æneas?"

“Sound Greek," said Æneas, mastering his agitation.

“Yes, and good Gaelic too; as he had touched my fire I darena harm him
if I wanted. I kept him here a month at no small hazard, for he was a
man put to the horn, denounced and searched for, and, as I was saying, I
was just a trifle 'neath the cloud myself among my enemies. He darena
venture home—that much we learned from Duncanson, who sent him money to
clear out the country. By luck, three nameless men were drowned on the
day Glenshiel was fought; some men of Glendaruel's were of opinion that
your father was among them, and said so in Argyll when they got back. We
heard of this from Duncanson—this all between ourselves, now, Mr
Æneas!—and Duncanson proposed that notion should be nourished. We
backed it up, and when the hunt was over for your father, he went off."

“Off," said Æneas blankly; “where?" The toe of Ninian's boot pressed on
his own so sorely that it made him wince.

“Where?" said Lovat vaguely, with a hiccough. “Oh, just off! The last of
him was riding out of here for Forth. He got from me a horse and saddle,
pledging they would be sent back from Perth or Stirling. They never
came; I cared less for the horse than for the saddle, that was something
of an heirloom, silver-mounted. But I must own he sent their value later
on through Duncanson."

Again was Ninian tapping on the ankle, with his nose dipped in a goblet,
and the knee of Æneas nudged him for assistance but he paid no heed.
“What's next for me to say?" thought Æneas, desperate, and made
incapable of guile by feelings far too intimate and solemn, threw his
cards upon the table.

“My lord," said he, “what you have told me there comes on me like a
thunder-clap."

“What way?" asked Lovat sharply, picking up a pipe and rubbing with its
bowl along his nose. “Your father paid the horse; I'm no' complainin'.
He might have had a score o' horse, and welcome."

“Not that," said Æneas, and his tongue felt in his mouth like pith for
dryness; “until the other day I never knew my father had been here——"

“Who was it told ye?" Lovat asked.

“Macdonnell of Barisdale," said Æneas.

“Col-of-the-tricks! Ye came across the country then wi' Campbell? . . .
That's a trifle ye forgot to mention, Ninian, last time that I saw ye!"

But Ninian, engrossed in talk with some one on his right, seemed deaf to
this appeal, though not too much aloof to give another tap to Æneas.

“Oh yes, my lord, we came together from Breadalbane," Æneas answered for
his friend. “I came on Mr Campbell in a change at Orchy. The tale of
Barisdale surprised me much. I always understood my father went straight
from Glenshiel to where the story went he perished."

“And where was that?" asked Lovat quickly, polishing a pipe he seldom
smoked.

“Loch Duich," answered Æneas.

Lovat looked at him, astonished.

“Loch Duich!" he exclaimed. “Ye surely do not mean to tell me that your
people took that tale in earnest! We only gave it just to cover up his
tracks."

“It looks as if they had been covered up too well," said Æneas. “Where
did my father go to?"

“It's strange indeed that you should have to ask me that;—to France,"
said Lovat. “The thing is almost unbelievable that you should be in
darkness all this time. Duncanson sent out his rents to him until he
died."

“Where did he die, and when, my lord?"

“I only know it was in France, about a twelvemonth later."

“Did Mr Duncanson ken that?" asked Æneas, and Ninian's hand below the
table clapped him on the knee approving, though he seemed aloof as ever.

Lovat showed the least degree of hesitation.

“I'll warrant ye he kent it," he replied. “It was from him I got it. Of
course it was a ticklish business at the time, for Duncanson was in the
pay of Islay and the Duke, and darena have the name of sheltering your
father, but it's queer to me so long a time should lapse before ye hear
the truth of it. You must have been a child yourself at that time, Mr
Æneas; but surely I have heard ye have an uncle?"

“He knows no more than I do," Æneas said bitterly.

“You're sure of that?"

“I am. He thinks my father perished in Kintail."

“And is he friendly wi' Duncanson?"

“No," said Æneas; “they haven't changed a word since Duncanson became
the laird."

“I see! I see!" said Lovat, pursing up his mouth, and looking underneath
the chin of Æneas at Ninian, still engaged. “The thing's beyond me!" he
declared; “unless——" and there he checked himself.

“The thing's as plain as porridge, sir," said Æneas. “He dare not let it
out that he was in a correspondence with my father, and he hates my
uncle, so he let the false tale stand."

“It looks like that," said Lovat anxiously.

“Your lordship cannot wonder that I feel concerned. It was a cruel thing
of Duncanson to keep us in the dark."

“Indeed I'm all aback at him!" said Lovat. “Put you the thing to him
yourself when ye get back"; and then he said with cunning so transparent
it was almost silly, “Tell him that it was from Barisdale ye got it—so
it was; my name need not be mentioned." In tones equivocal and wheedling
he expressed his sympathy, but laid most weight on the necessity for
tact in opening up the story, and tact with him meant plainly no desire
to clash with Duncanson.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A HANK UNRAVELLED.


Æneas sat like a stone for some time after this astounding revelation.
The brawling of the table-foot had swelled again, and Lovat started
blandishing a stockish little man dressed in the Highland habit with a
scarlet waistcoat scarce more flaming than his face, who was at
variance, it seemed, with one who from the first had caught the eye of
Æneas—an officer of troops in uniform. Ninian was at a brisk exchange
of stories with a big-jowled man upon his right, and hotching to the
other's humour. The piper on the sward outby was playing “Fingal's
Weeping" on a sobbing chanter, grief's peculiar note; the pibroch alone
was in the key of Æneas, on whom a great resentment came that folk
should laugh while through himself went sweeping tides of indignation.
In those three minutes' talk with Lovat something staple in his life was
overwhelmed. Yet here was Ninian who had brought him there with a
deliberate purpose to get Lovat talking, under influence of Lovat's
claret, plainly, cracking heedless with a fat-jowled fool.

The officer was one named Burt, an English captain, paymaster to Wade. A
peaceable and sober man, he sat all through the dinner, and what Lovat
called the jinks that followed, something of a foreigner among his
fellows, sipping at his wine restrainedly, and not to be enticed to that
more potent beverage, the Ferintosh, that most of them by now had
started on. They took it out of stemless glasses, smashed in some former
bacchanalia to discourage heel-taps, and the tankard oftenest was at the
elbow of the man with the scarlet waistcoat, whom the others called
Culcairn. Culcairn, a Fraser of cadet relation to Lord Lovat, had some
rankling spirit of resentment still at something that had happened
months before—the stoppage of a pay he drew in Lovat's Independent
Corps—and sought to draw the soldier out on his opinion of the Highland
Companies.

Burt gave them every credit short of discipline and strict concurrence
with the aims of Wade. Their knowledge of the country and the folk, he
said, was of the first importance; they had been bred to arms and
steeled to hardships; nothing could be said against their courage, but
he feared they were more loyal to their chiefs and clans than to the
crown.

“And what for no?" cried out Culcairn. “My skin is nearer to me than my
coat, as we will say in Gaelic. I never saw the king between the eyes
but on a signboard, and I ken MacShimi."

Burt gave a little smile. “With all respect to our noble host," said he,
“I'm certain he regards the interests of the clan as second to the
welfare of the country at large, or else the North was barbarous."

“Barbarous!" screamed out Culcairn, a naming fury on him, too much gone
in drink to grapple with what qualified the word. “It's on a piece of
grass outside we could be settling that!"

He jumped to his feet, with a thickened neck, and his black beard
bristling; two of his neighbours, laughing, gripped him round the
middle; the room was in a turmoil for defence of Burt, who sat composed.

“Gentlemen! gentlemen!" cried Lovat in reproof, his paunch upon the
table. “I think the deil himsel' could not keep sulphur to my kinsman's
furies; what now in all the earth is wrong with you, my dear Culcairn?"

“Devil a thing but drink!" replied Culcairn with honesty, and laughing
now himself.

“It's not the drink, I'll warrant ye!" said Lovat. “Culloden never
brewed a sounder tipple; it's your heid that's not the heid it was, sir;
in faith, in that respect I fear it's like my own. I doubt, good cousin,
we are gettin' old." He gave a pawky smile and passed his hand across
his forehead. “Many a tree we scourged, Culcairn, and many a flagon
tilted, but we used to keep our tempers, you and me that's off the
self-same blood. What ails my robin redbreist at ye, Captain Burt?"

“A point of judgment on the Independent Companies," said Burt. “I
ventured to remark to Mr Fraser that they had some faults."

“And very right you are there, Captain Burt!" said Lovat. “Such as they
are at present I cannot deny it. Just a useless lot of gillies!"

“But still a dangerous weapon ready for the hands of disaffection."

He could not have expressed a thought more stinging to his host, whose
Highland company was taken from him just for such a fear!

Lovat scowled and purpled. Burt saw his error instantly and hastened to
amend. “I spoke particularly," said he, “of those upon the Road. Their
knowledge ought to make our work as safe as if it were on Constitution
Hill, and yet it doesn't."

Lovat with an effort mastered his vexation. “There's nothing in that
view," said he, “that my friend Culcairn need quarrel with, I'm sure.
The Government that took my company from me took it from the one man in
the Highlands fit to keep the peace; thank God, it never fell to me to
ward the Road—I have no great regard for it."

“Why not, my lord?" asked Burt, astonished.

“I'll leave it to my good friend Mr Campbell to adduce the reason," said
Lord Lovat, turning upon Ninian a waggish smile of challenge.

“Bad for the feet! bad for the feet!" said Ninian readily. “Harder than
ever to walk to kirk; it's neither good for men nor horses,"—and the
company roared.

“But likely to be very good for business," broke in Æneas, astonished in
a moment at himself to be so suddenly and warm the merchant, half
compelled by some annoyance at his friend and a repugnance at that
spirit of reaction or arrest he felt in Lovat. Between this orgy and the
pibroch, plaintive, singing Fingal's sorrow in the glens of Tir-nan-Og,
old days remembering, was no single bond!

“Business!" cried Lovat, throwing up his hands. “My good young friend
says 'business'—what in fortune's name do we want wi' business? Here is
a healthy and contented people bruicking and enjoying every comfort
fitted to their state, secure of the invasion of those desperate and
levelling ideas that in other places have played havoc with the loyalty
of commons, and reduced authority of chiefs. There is no one under the
cope and canopy of heaven loves his country and his king—God bless
him!—more truly than myself, and I have given the proofs of it on more
than one occasion, but as for roads and schools and all that means of
stenting and of levying, I'm utterly against them in the shire of
Inverness."

“Not schools!" said Æneas boldly, shocked beyond measure. “Surely not
schools!"

“Yes, schools!" said Lovat, thumping on the table. “What good are they
to Gaeldom? So long as men of family can have their children tutored in
what arts belong to their position, either in their homes or furth the
country, the setting up of schools for all and sundry of the folk is
contrar to the welfare of the State. My people always have what fits
them best in their condition—schooling of the winter and the blast,
rough fare, the hills to strive wi', and the soil to break. They need no
more, except their swords and skill to use them. What do you say to
that, Macmaster?"

He leaned upon his arms, swung round upon his hips, and snarled the
question in the young man's ear; and Æneas, looking at the face thrust
close up to his own, saw in it everything for which he had
contempt—unscrupulous craft, and cruelty, and greed.

“It sounds to me," said he, “like blasphemy."

A glitter came to Lovat's eyes; a flicker crossed his face, and Æneas
perceived without concern that he had made an enemy.

“Your sentiment about the road, my lord, seems pretty general in
Inverness," said Burt. “Poor Leggatt, up on Corryarrick, had a furlong
of his work destroyed three nights ago. But as for business, the clans
seem wonderfully quick to learn it; down in Badenoch they're shipping
guns from Holland."

“Hoot-toot!" said Lovat mockingly, “ye'll tell me next they're for a
rising, Captain Burt. I had that news already from my good friend Mr
Campbell."

“Oh no," said Burt, “we're not alarmed for that; we know now what
they're meant for—thanks, I hear, to Mr Campbell. Leggatt has picked up
three hundred stands of arms."

“Where?" asked Lovat sharply.

“Somewhere near Lock Laggan," said the Captain, who had not yet got his
“chs."

“Capital!" cried Lovat. “I never heard a word of it."

“I only heard, myself, to-day, sir, when the post came in."

“The post!" said Lovat quickly, pricking up. “I havena seen a post since
Monday was a week."

Æneas touched him on the arm. “My lord," said he, “unless I'm cheated,
he is here. I saw a runner with a bag outby among the gillies."

“Ye did!" said Lovat sourly. “Ye might have told me sooner, man!" and
making an excuse, went from the room.

He was gone for twenty minutes. Burt, for part of that time, kept the
rest in tune with more particulars of what had happened on the Road, and
then when he was done, the spirit of the company went flat as whey.
Ninian alone maintained his animation, cackling like a cobbler with his
neighbour; it looked as if he had forgot that such a friend as Æneas was
in the world. A clock outside struck seven with harsh deliberation; dusk
was fallen, and the room grown dark. “It's time that we were gone," said
some one; “Simon's off for his usual sleep."

When Lovat did return, it was to find his guests all ready for
departure. Pleading something instant and important in his letters as
excuse for his delay, he pressed on them a final dram he called the
door-drink, cloaking up in drolleries his willingness to see them gone.
Ninian and Æneas were the last to shake his hand.

“I'd like to see ye, sir, again," he said to Æneas. “What quarters have
ye in the town?"

“Fraser's in the Kirk Street," answered Æneas.

“But we leave to-morrow morning," Ninian added quickly, to his friend's
surprise.

“To-morrow!—bless my heart!" said Lovat blankly. Not another word but
that, and turned upon his heel.

*        *        *        *        *

The sun had set a while and dark was spreading; a north wind sharply
cold was blowing, with a smirr of rain, and they had two miles of a walk
before them, into Beauly. The jowled man, who was Ninian's neighbour at
the table and had plainly liked his company, was waiting for them at the
gate, the tippet of his coat about his head—a crazy figure—set on
showing them a shorter way to Beauly than the one they came by. His
shorter way, they found, was longer than their own but passed his house,
a solitary, sloven place that seemed to crave for human company. He was
insistent on their entering, promising a better dram than Lovat's, but
they would not stop. Nor even then could they get quit of him; he took a
bouat-lamp and trudged through fields and herbage rank and wet until
they reached the outskirts of the village, where he left them. His
tongue had gone the whole way like the clatter of a mill, with no
assistance from the two, who only listened, finding it engaged them
quite enough to pick their steps across the wilderness of weed and
stubble. When he had bade them boisterously good night and turned for
home, they watched his lantern bobbing for a little through the mirk.

“That's the dreariest body ever wore a tippet! My grief, it's me that's
sick of him," said Ninian in a voice as sober as the Sabbath.

“You seemed to find his talk engaging," Æneas said dryly. “The two of
you went cracking at the table like a bush of whin."

“It's not much depth of crack ye'll get from one so heavy on the dram;
the man's fair stoving wi' MacShimi's drink."

He said it with an air of such disgust that Æneas marvelled.

“I thought you werena slack yourself!" said he.

“A chiall!" cried Ninian. “Me! Just listen!" He moved upon his feet
and made a sound that showed his boots were squirting-wet inside.
“That's my share of Simon's liquor. I feel as if I had been wading in
the ebb, but better in my boots than in my belly! . . . Oh, Æneas!" he
said, and put his two hands on the other's shoulders, “you and me are
well met! I liked ye from the start, but never better than this night
when you drew out the badger—yes, and gave him word for word defiant,
like a man!"

“My share of it," said Æneas, “was simple as a child's. I did no more
than ask him questions."

“That was it! Ye profited by what I told ye—always to be frank when
dealing wi' a rogue, and got from him what I could not manœuvre to get
from him in a twelvemonth. It's nothing but the face of ye!—that face
of yours, so honest, would beguile the kestrel from the tree. My own is
too much like a jyler's; let me just say 'How's the weather?' to a man
like Simon, and he backs out parrying, wonderin' where I'll light. My
boy, ye have done nobly! Feel you, now, at this!"

The bobbing lamp was quenched by some twist of the track its bearer
followed; they were on the lee of bushes, sheltered from the wind that
carried from the shore the sound of breakers, and the night was
cauldron-black. Something rubbed the arm of Æneas, and he caught what
Ninian thrust on him—a piece of stick with a one rolled on it neatly to
the very end!

“Oh, Ninian!" he cried, “which is it?"

“What but my own affair! My sorrow! that it's not your father's.
Trudging through the grass there with that blether of a man, I kept my
fingers and my wits engaged on Ninian's private hank, and got the last
twist out of it. That's all bye wi't now,—I have my gentleman!"

He said it with a savage exultation, grinding with his teeth.

“Lovat?" said Æneas.

“Yes, Lovat! And he knows it! That man Burt made a botch of it when he
let it slip that I was him that found the meaning of the guns. I hadna
said a word of that to Sim when I saw him last, and well he knows the
reason now. He saw it in a minute—did ye see his thrapple working? It's
good for you and me a company was there to see us, and that drunken man
to give us a convoy, or we were maybe now in irons, warded in the
dungeon."

Æneas was shocked and dubious.

“I somehow hate the man," said he, “but still—but still—I think he may
be, in his own way, honest."

“Honest!" said Ninian. “Honesty's not natural to human-kind; it takes a
devil of a lot of practice, like the pipes, and Lovat never had the
training. Man! ye're just in some particulars a child. Ye're lookin'
round about for fairy stories—something that ye saw in books; but I'm a
beachdair out for flesh and blood. And oh! it's just a splendid world,
to have both right and wrong in it, to give the beachdair chance! Give
me that hank; it's done wi'—let us on!"

He started walking through the dark.

“Are you certain sure it's Lovat?" said Æneas, still dubious.

“I wish I was as sure of getting home to Inveraray wi' my hide complete.
That, now, 's the only thing to bother me. I'm leaving in the morning,
whether you can come or no'. Old Sim was staggered when he heard of
that. It doesna give him time to set his snares. Ye saw the way he took
it?"

“You said that Barisdale and he were foes."

“Toots! Never fash wi' Barisdale. Barisdale it was who led me all
astray. Whoever was the man who put Col on to us it wasna Lovat, and
whatever was the reason, Lovat's interest was not concerned. I'm
thinking to mysel', Æneas, that's a twist that belongs to the other
hank! We'll let it bide just now. If Lovat's thrapple worked when he
heard I knew what meant the guns, he nearly choked when he heard that
Leggatt had them. 'Capital!' says he; but he didna think it capital a
bit in that way—not wi' a comb in his throat like yon,—rather he was
thinking on the capital he lost in that three hundred stands of
firelocks. A man like Lovat never should put lip to drink: he fairly put
himself into my hands this night wi' yon explosions about roads and
schools. It's him that heads the bond of remnant clans to worry Wade;
it's him that has been shipping guns from Holland; it's him that knows
the Hielan' claymore 's still among the thatch. I'm done wi' him—the
rest 's wi' Islay!"

“But still," said Æneas, “I'm loth to think the man who gave my father
sanctuary would play this double part."

“That for him!" said Ninian, and spat. “Ye never ken a man until ye
drive a spoil wi' him. Did you see yon lank lad wi' the ear-rings at the
table foot? We never got his name from Lovat."

“I noticed him," said Æneas.

“That is one called Patrick Grant, the skipper of a boat now lying in
the road off Inverness—my drunken neighbour told me. Grant's a
gentleman of family from Rothiemurchus. I heard of him three weeks ago.
The muskets landed at Blackness came off his boat!"

Yet Æneas, all through this, as if a part of him had shed the immediate
senses and stood somewhere back in time, saw, mounted on a horse, his
father riding into mist!

“You heard," said he, “what Lovat said about my father?"

“You may be sure of that!" said Ninian, standing. “I was two men
yonder—one that gave his tongue to nonsense, one that gave to Lovat's
least bit word his two good ears, and oh, mo creach! I got another
blow, for Sim's not guilty!"

“Of what?" asked Æneas. The rain was on his face, the wind was driving.
They stood close up together on a track that led down to the river where
their boat was waiting.

“Of half a dozen things, and all of them the blackest, that were hanging
in my mind," said Ninian in a gust. “The dungeon—or the tree—or the
plantations!"

“My God!" cried Æneas, “I thought of all these things!"

“And well ye might! They have been long the tools of Lovat. But this
time he's not guilty. Yon was a true tale that he told ye!"

“I thought it sounded true," said Æneas with agitation.

“As true's the tomb! Your father started off from Castle Dounie. Ye
wiled the truth from Sim by simple honesty, and I was there in terror
thinking ye would spoil it all by blurting out too soon about Loch
Duich. When you came out with that the man was fair dumfounded! I know
what, now, disturbed Drimdorran! Ye didna steal the snuffbox, but I'll
ask ye this—did you ransack his desk?"

“I did not," said Æneas, gulping.

“Well, it's a damn pity that ye didna! I swear he thinks ye did! In yon
bit desk, as sure as I'm Macgregor, lies proof that Duncanson deceived
your folk!"

“But what, in God's name, for?" cried Æneas, bewildered. “I said myself
to Lovat it might be because he feared to have the name of sheltering a
rebel, but, on thinking since, that seems impossible. The thing's blown
by long years ago. In fourteen years he surely could have plucked up
courage to have told the truth to my father's brother. It would have
been a feather in his cap."

Ninian stood dumb.

“Can ye not help me?" said Æneas piteously. “Where did my father go? How
did he die? For what did he keep silence there in France with not a word
for me or for his brother?"

Still Ninian stood silent, thinking, fiddling in his hands a line all
tangled. At last he spoke, with great solemnity.

“Look at the night!" said he in Gaelic. “Hearken to the sea-wave
roaring! That is the mind of Ninian—no blink of light in him, and every
wave of speculation shattering. . . . I'll have to sleep on it."




CHAPTER XIX.

THE TRAMMEL NET.


Their skiff was lying at the quay, her man sound sleeping, coiled up,
like a whelk, in a den decked forward at her bows: they roused him up,
hoised sail, and started down the water, Ninian's one lament that there,
behind them, in that place he hated, should be Primrose Campbell still
in bonds. Until they turned a headland opening up the frith, the wind
was in their favour; now it was dead-on-end. It blew out from the east
in squalls that scooped the brine and flung it in their faces, stinging
them like pellets, rattling in the sail like salt. They were not twenty
minutes out when, staggering in stays, the skiff was swept by one great
sea that crossed her quarter, drenched them to the bone, and now was
frothing through the ballast. They beat into the Black Isle shore where
sea-birds cried on ebbing beaches, put about and reached, with little
gain, for the bays of Bunchrew, as the fisher called them—wooded land
where trees were brawling.

“Far better had we ridden out or walked!" said Ninian at last. “We'll
not be there till morning, and I'm sitting in a dub. I canna stand your
boats; give me red earth! This skiff is making no more of it than a
shuttle."

Two hours they beat from shore to shore, and then, in a tack to port,
came close in on a light.

“Is that the ferry?" Ninian asked, his clothes a sop on him.

“It's Clachnaharry," said the man.

“Then in we go!" said Ninian. “We'll walk the carse and save an hour of
weaving."

They landed at a slip, paid off the boat, passed through a sleeping
village, followed a muirland road a mile, and reached the town upon the
stroke of midnight, and the rain downpouring. It was as if they came
upon a graveyard! No creature moved; the tenements were shuttered;
throughout the lanes the wind went volleying; thatch and slate gushed
water noisily as though they had been, brimming weirs. And every light
in Inverness was quenched, save one that moved about low down beside the
river.

Ninian, looking from the bridge, gave out a whistle, and the light blew
out as if it had been bitten.

“It's never too late for mischief!" he said, chuckling. “Give you a
whistle in the night when folk seem sleeping, and ye'll always hear some
skurry. These lads have been at poaching."

Their inn was of the humblest, picked by Ninian—as it proved with
shrewdness—on a likelihood that they might have it mainly to
themselves: it did, by day, a roaring trade in vintnery, but they alone,
since they had come, had been its boarders. It formed part of a long
three-storey land or tenement in which it was the only domicile, a bit
back from the river, flanked by what had one time been town-houses of
the gentry, now degraded into stores on one hand and a lint-work on the
other.

As they were coming to it they heard footsteps on the causeway.

“Stop!" said Ninian slyly. “Maybe there's a fish for breakfast, and we
shouldna spoil it. These are the lads o' lantern. They're making for the
inn."

Clean through the inn went running from the street an entry, close, or
pend, high-arched and broad enough to pass a cart. Two men—to judge by
sounds; it was too dark for seeing,—laden with some burden from the
river, dashed into the close, and Ninian and Æneas loitered. When they
reached its mouth the wind was skirling through it, and there came from
parts behind the smells of malt and leather. A lamp for usual lit the
entrance to the inn, which was at midway through the close, but now, as
if their landlord had despaired of their returning, it was out.

Æneas was about to rap.

“Stop you a wee!" said Ninian; “I told ye that I never saw a man go up a
close but I would wonder. I want to make it sure these lads are in."

He went through to the back, and stumbled on a bundle, felt it with his
hands, looked round a green, high-walled, he knew by daylight, and came
back.

“Nothing there but their trammel net," said he. “It's fish for
breakfast!" and rapped upon the door. Inside there was a scuttling.

“A trammel net!" said Æneas. “What is a trammel net?"

“Oh just a kind of a net for foolish fishes. . . . What is keeping my
friend the Ferret? He'll be frightened that we ken the way he buys his
fish. Stick from the wood, deer from the hill, and salmon from the
linn—no honest Gael took shame of them!" and again he rapped more
urgently.

This time their landlord answered, with a candle in his hand—a
long-nosed sandy man with bead-like eyes, no chin to speak of, and a
whisker combed back to his ears completing that resemblance to a ferret
which made Ninian call him that as by-name. Behind him lay the kitchen,
dark but for a fire that seemed to Æneas the cheeriest he had ever seen,
for he was shivering; the more appealing since the chamber shared
upstairs with Ninian had no fireplace.

“We're late," said Ninian in Gaelic, “and what's more, we're wet, and
hunger's on us. Fetch us up the stair a half man of good spirits and a
bite of something."

“Whatever the gentlemens say," replied the landlord, peering at them
queerly with his head aside. He had some silly notion that more state
was in the English.

They took two candlesticks he offered, lit them at his own, and climbed
the stair.

“Isn't that the Fraser dirt!" said Ninian, throwing off his coat, all
soaking. “A man that keeps an inn should be a gentleman, and that one's
but a clout. Look at them two candles!—burned down to the dowp, and
they were almost hale last night when we were bedded."

“He might have asked us to the fire," said Æneas, taking off the belt
about his loins that bore his money and his pistol.

“Na, na! no fears o' him! And gets him to his English!—'Whatever the
gentlemens say'! I never saw him looking more the ferret! I wonder where
he put yon night-lads skulking!"

Fraser in a little while came up with a piece of pickled tongue, the
whisky, and some scones. Even to the eye of Æneas was something singular
in his manner. He never looked at them but with his head aside,
obliquely, and his face was sallow.

“Would the gentlemens like to dry their clothes?" he asked them; “I
could take them to the kitchen."

“That's just what I was thinking to mysel'," said Ninian. “But first of
all, bring up two candles; this pair's nearly perished."

Downstairs he went again, a little grudgingly; they stripped their
clothes from them and changed their shirts and put on John Maclaren's
garments, at which the Ferret looked with some surprise when he came
back, but nothing said. He lit the two new candles, blew the old stumps
out, and put them in his pocket; then bent down and gathered up the wet
clothes of his guests and took his leave.

They drank part of the spirits and sat down to eat, when all of a sudden
Ninian started up and looked about him.

“He's taken away your belt!" said he.

“What odds?" said Æneas. “There's nothing in it now except some
shillings and the pistol. I left the money yesterday with Saul."

“It's me that's glad to learn't," said Ninian, relieved. “If only ye can
trust Mackay! But that's your uncle's business. Yet, still-and-on, we'll
need to get that pistol; never let your wife nor arms sleep in another's
chamber. Have ye got your powder-horn?"

“It's in my coat-tail pocket; let it bide!" said Æneas, tired of these
precautions.

“Then up she comes!" said Ninian firmly. “Poor is the pistol wanting
powder and the pipes without a man!" and going to the door he cried out
down the stair to Fraser what he wanted.

“That's right!" he said when Fraser brought them up. “A horn is not a
safe thing drying at a fire unless a man is wearied of his mistress."

“She's not at home," said Fraser; “she went out to spend the night at
Kessock with her sister," always with his head aside.

“Then ye'll be all alone?" said Ninian carelessly.

“Yes," said the Ferret. “Good-night with ye, gentlemens," and left them,
creaking down the stair, his head more to the side than ever.

Ninian sat down at last, began a grace, and had not got half through it
when he stopped, and, opening his eyes, looked at the pistol. It lay
behind his plate, the flask beside it. With Æneas regarding him, amused,
he took it in his hand and probed it with the rammer.

“Was it loaded?" he inquired.

“Yes," said Æneas. “You loaded it yourself this morning."

“Then, by God!" said Ninian below his breath, “there's something wrong,
for now it has been gelded!" and he tapped the barrel on the table. A
few loose grains of powder spilled.

Until that moment Æneas had looked on the other's fidgeting with
unconcern, so much was clamant in his mind of more perplexing things,
but now there rushed on him a feeling that the hour was eerie and that
something in the air gave to the inn a quality of brooding expectation.
Outside, the dead dark of the night was boisterous with wind and the
splash of waters, that by contrast made the inner muteness evil. Each
time the landlord had come up he seemed more sinister; each time he had
gone down it was as though a grave engulfed him—not a sound!

Ninian, with a face of clay, picked up the powder-flask and shook it,
then turned down its beak and poured a charge into the pistol barrel.
His hand was trembling so, a part of the charge was spilled into his
plate; he glowered at it, infuriate.

“Sand!" said he. “They've taken out the powder and filled up with
sand! My grief! but they've got the twist of us!"

“What does it mean?" said Æneas, with an uproar in his heart; his
comrade's face dismayed him.

“What does it mean but that accursed money ye have got the name of! The
Ferret and these men are meaning pillage; and they think they've pulled
our teeth, but better far for biting old Grey Colin!"

The broadsword hung upon a bedpost next the wall, in shadow. He lifted
it, and made to strip it of its scabbard. A muffled oath from him filled
Æneas with new alarm.

“In the name of the Good Being, look at that!" he said distressfully
between his teeth in Gaelic. “Sword of my father, and they have put
hands on thee! Colin! Colin! Let me get him that bashed thee in, and I
will give thee flesh!"

He showed the sword to Æneas, almost weeping. One side of the
basket-hilt had been hammered on the gripe so close a hand could not get
entrance, and the weapon was as useless as a wand.

“But no!" said he, “I'm not done yet; I have my fingers, Fraser!" He
screwed the pommel off and slid the basket from its tang; put down the
blade, and as a man would straighten horse-shoes, pulled the basket bars
apart to their old position, every sinew of his hands a wire that might
have twanged.

Æneas, in some queer confusion of the senses, chewed a bit of scone to
soothe an ache of emptiness that took him in the stomach.

“Stop that! the hour of battle is not for meat," said Ninian, his sword
assembled, and he whipped the scones into his pocket. “I'll never say
grace in Inverness again until the meat is in me. If there's only three
men there, we'll bide and deal with them and then take supper, but if
there's more, as there well might be, we'll feed, then, like the gannet,
flying. . . . There's my dirk for ye," and he took it from the pillow
where he placed it when they stripped; “ye're a quick hand at the
pistol, see what ye can do wi' steel!"

Æneas seized the dagger like a truncheon.

“That's not the way!" said Ninian, and showed him how to grip it with
the palm held down. “Strike up at all times in a scuffle; ward wi' your
other arm and your plaid about it; the thing's to get him on the groin."

In the lock of the door inside had always been a key which they found
was now awanting; they opened the door with caution, and heard for the
first time mutterings below. At a sound so seeming warrant for their
fears, all fears abandoned Æneas and gave place to calculation.

“If it comes to the worst," said he, “we can leave by the window."

“And break our necks!" said Ninian.

“No need for that; we can first get on the butts and then jump down."

“Now that's a thing I never noticed," whispered Ninian, “and ye put me
to my shame to be so stupid. Nothing beats a back-road in a battle."

They pulled the window open easily and looked out to the back. The rain
was still in torrents, and a gutter from the roof was spouting loudly in
some barrels close below. From kilns and tanneries in the lands beyond
the walls came smells of malt and leather.

Assured that the casks were lidded, Ninian drew in and stared to see a
candle flicker to extinction. An inch of it had not been burned, and yet
it quickly languished to an ember!

“What's this of it?" said he suspiciously, and fingered at the wick. It
came away, a fragment, from the tallow! With the knife that always dwelt
below his armpit, he slit up the candle quickly as a man would gut, and
found no wick from end to end of it.

“What think ye now of that?" he said, and showed his teeth, then
pouncing on the other candle cut it into halves. The only wick it had
was the short piece at the top still burning; both candles had been
stripped and moulded up again.

“Mo chreach! Mo chreach!" said he, “aren't they in the hurry to be at
us! No shot—no sword—no glimmer, but the hearty dunt of blows! Mind
what I said about the dirk!"

“To tell ye the God's own truth, I'm sweir to use it," Æneas said sadly.
“Why should we bide, and there the window?"

“Because I want to see them!" Ninian hissed. “We'll take to the window
in time enough. I'll hold them off till you get out, then bolt you
through the close out to the street and wait for me. But if there's only
two and Fraser——!"

He opened the door, with the candle in his one hand and Grey Colin in
the other. Below was now more patently the sound of some disturbance.

“What are you going to do?" asked Æneas.

“Get them all on the stair while the candle lasts. . . . Light!
landlord, light! Bring up a candle!" he cried loudly.

There was a moment's stillness, then there burst out from below a
clatter of many feet on the kitchen flagstones—muffled exclamations.
Followed, a rush, and four men huddled at the stair-foot, staggered for
a second by the light, then started climbing singly, brandishing with
cudgels.

“Four, no' counting Fraser," ruefully said Ninian. “Bundle and go, my
lad, and I'll be after ye!"

Æneas leaped for the window.

The candle Ninian had was flickering, with little life in it; he held it
high above his head and stood in shadow, so they could not see his
sword. But they were all in light; he saw their sunburnt faces, every
man a rogue. They came without a pause, hard on each other's heels, and
the first on the landing, one with a fiery beard, lashed out wildly with
his stick.

“Sin agad!" screamed Ninian, his blood on fire, and thrust him through
the ribs.

The man went reeling back upon his followers.

“That's my father's sword and my fist in it!" Ninian cried. And at that
moment died his light. Heaped on the stair with the struck man rolling
on them, all the others swore in consternation.

“It's a ferret ye want!" cried Ninian in the darkness. “A Fraser ferret!
Go back, ye messan dogs, and send him in!"

He backed into the room and clashed the door behind him; dashed for the
open window, dropped on the water butt, and reached the ground with the
broadsword in his hand. Rain battered still, and the night seemed empty
but of wind and water, yet something in the gloom disquieted. He stood
for a moment peering, gathered himself together, shot for the close, and
fell upon its threshold, netted like a hare.

The men who held the net came out of their obscurity and piled the
trammel's ends on him: he struggled in the mesh and gave one cry, loud
out, “Oh, Æneas! the net! the net!"

They struck him with a cudgel like the hare.




CHAPTER XX.

TO THE WOODS.


Ninian, like a bubble, floated up from those grey deeps and bottomless,
that lie below the living world. A while he swung upon the surface, and
he thought himself a fish. His fingers were in meshes, and his mouth was
filled with net. He thought himself with fins and scales in Tulla, and
there drifted through him notions of a passage from the sea—by sands of
Etive and the Pass of Brander, surging through Loch Awe, and rushing at
the leaps of Orchy. Netted! That ignoble death! And, oh, but it was
cold! He heard the race of water.

Something cleared from off the surface by-and-by as suds clear from a
pool; he shook himself and found he was a man. His head was aching, but
a sore far sharper was the sense of something wrong, of deprivation;
memory was for the moment dulled but not destroyed.

Now all came slowly back to him—the sea-drenched boat, the conflict on
the stair, his leap into the trammel stretched across the close, his
warning cry to Æneas.

That was what was hurting so within him—where was Æneas?

Some seal was on his eyes; he could not open them at first, and wondered
was he blinded. Then he guessed the reason of that tuainealaich in his
head—he had been smitten, and the stream of blood had clotted on his
face. When he had got his eyelids parted, and looked up, he saw the
black vault of the night, and through one hole in it a star. Quite close
beside his feet the river gurgled.

And he was bound!

The net was coiled about him, part of it stuffed in his mouth for gag;
some bights of cord were tight wound round his hands and feet; he lay on
sand.

With a struggle he got up his pinioned hands and reached the knife below
his armpit; slashed through the meshes; cleared his feet; stood up, and
with the knife between his teeth cut through the last bonds on his
wrists.

“Faith!" said he, “I'm early to the river!" and felt his head. “Ah! were
ye dunting, lads? Ye were the boys to split oak timber! Thank God I wore
Maclaren's good thrum bonnet, and I'll get my knee yet on your chests!"

He bathed his face; cut out a yard of net and put it in his pocket;
sliced from the bank a turf of grass and threw it in the river; then
went up and into Kirk Street. Still was the night blind-black, but dry.

There were lights in Fraser's inn, and in the close were women talking,
their feet unshod and plaids about their heads. It did not take him long
to get their story. The inn had been attacked, poor Fraser bound; two
gentlemen were spoiled and missing.

“Just that!" said Ninian, with a whistle. “Very good indeed!" and passed
into the house where half a dozen neighbours had been called by an alarm
from a slattern servant lass who slept up in a garret. Her master had
been found, a piteous object, tied up on the kitchen floor, lamenting
for his guests whose money was the aim of the marauders.

“And where, now, is the decent body?" Ninian asked, as he looked about
the kitchen, all tossed up as if a tide had swept it, but with nothing
broken.

“Up the stairs in his bed, poor man!" said an old grey fellow. “Ar't
thou, by any chance, now, one of the worthy gentlemen?"

“I'm thinking to myself I am," said Ninian, “but I have here a head on
me that's like a pot that would be kicked round in a quarry. Did no one
see my friend?"

Nobody had seen him. Before the alarm had broken out, the spoilers and
the spoiled had vanished.

Ninian took the lantern from above the entrance; lit its lamp, and
searched out through the close and to the back where, on the ground,
without a stain on it, the dirk was lying.

“They've got him!" he said to himself with great vexation. “They shot
their trammel twice and got two fish; and now the wits of me and God be
wi' Macmaster!"

Then in, and up a stair that had been newly washed, and picked the
knapsacks up, and through a lobby to where Fraser lay in bed. When
Ninian came in on him he seemed to shrivel; then he sat upright and
stared, a tassel on his night-cap wagging. The only light was from the
lantern, and Ninian had the naked dirk; it had a glint; his body loomed
in shadow like the shade of Vengeance.

“Where is my friend?" said he in Gaelic.

“What way on the earth of the world should I know that, good man?" said
Fraser, trembling like a leaf. “They put on me the rope."

“It's on thy neck thou'lt have it next!" said Ninian, bending over him.
“Who were they?"

“I never put an eye on them before," said Fraser, and his bed was
shaking. “They came in strength and hardihood and mastered me."

“Oh, mhic an galla!" Ninian said in fury; caught him by the neckband
of his shirt, and dragged him on the floor. “Stand up there on thy legs
and look on me! Where are our clothes that were at drying?"

“They took them with them," said the Ferret.

“Where is my friend?" again said Ninian, and gave the dirk a shake.

“Cuid——" broke out the landlord in a scream for help, and with a
kick at him, but did not get the word completed; Ninian with the
dirk-hilt struck him in the stomach and he fell convulsed.

“Take thou that now till I come back!" said Ninian, and deliberately
went down the stair and to the street, two knapsacks on his back. He had
the lantern with him, and its light seemed all that was alive in
Inverness beyond himself. Its beams lit up the lands and inner grime of
closes; every street he searched—there were not many,—every lane, and
now and then would whistle softly or give out the howlet call that Æneas
by this time knew.

He had come back from the cross to near the inn again, when suddenly
from out a vennel leading to the river, some men made at him. The deluge
of the night had choked the syvors of the street and left a pond the men
must wade through to the brawn, or skirt, to reach him; one started
wading while the others ran about the pool, and Ninian bolted from the
street between two tenements and into tracks unbuilded on behind the
lands. He found himself among small bleaching-greens and gardens, fenced
by low dry-stone walls which he climbed or vaulted. But for the lantern,
they had caught him, for they followed nimbly; he saw where to leap and
what to shun while they came stumbling after him in darkness, clashing
into walls and tripping among kail stocks, so that soon he left them
well behind. But then there came an end to flight in this direction; up
before him rose a lofty tenement with early morning lights already
glimmering at a window here and there; he whipped round sharply, crossed
a tanner's yard, and through a close into the street again. A bit ahead
of him he heard a cheery whistling.

But now the lantern that had been his friend was like to be his enemy;
the chase had seen it swerve, and through another close got to the
street as quickly as himself, and now was pelting up behind him. He
heard their feet.

The whistling came from a boy who at a well was filling water-stoups, as
cheery as the thrush, with neither boot nor bonnet on him, and his wee
breast bare, and Ninian ever loved a whistling boy.

“Would you like a bonny lantern, boy?" said he, and his ear cocked for
the folk behind him.

“Fine!" said the laddie, eager.

“Well, there it is for ye, my hero! Skelp you off for home or these bad
men that's following me will take it from ye!"

The boy grabbed at his prize, forsook his stoups, and darted down a
lane. Ninian followed for a little, then slipped up a close, to come out
again when his pursuers passed like beagles, hot on a spurious trail. A
while he watched the lantern darting; then it rose up on a stair and
disappeared—the boy was home!

“Now for the woods!" said Ninian to himself, and made at leisure for the
bridge.

For more than an hour he trudged, part by the noisy sea, and night was
turning to a milky dawn when he plunged at last through breckans into a
nut-wood that stretched back for miles on either hand a burn, and
changed, to the distant south, to wilder woods and blacker, upon lofty
hills. He had made for it as the stag for sanctuary, and the wild mare
of the moors in her own time for the place where she was foaled. But
once before had he seen it, as a boy, coming down from the Caiplich with
his folk, and dogs behind them, and had slept in a cave of Bunchrew till
a fine spring morning. The first burn he had fished! The very stones of
it were in his memory!

What, all these years, he had thought a cavern deep and spacious,
proved, when he reached it now, but a small recess in the bank of the
water, screened by trails of toad-flax and the ivy. It occupied an
eas—a deep cleft of the hill wherethrough a burn went churning, and a
plash and gurgle made it pleasant. The steep banks rose high up above
the water, bearded with the hazel, dripping; birds were wakened, and the
wae wee chirrup of the yellow-yite, the robin's pensive ditty, came from
out the clusters of the nuts.

“Now I am home!" said Ninian, putting down his pokes, and did a strange
thing there. He plucked his bonnet off, and turning to the east,
stretched out his hands. A moment stood he so, and then bent down and
bathed his face, and stood again, and chanted—

On his wounded head he rubbed some salve, felt at his stubbled chin, and
took from his sack the razors, but returned them without shaving. He
made a fire, and cut a wand, and dropped a maggot in a pool and caught
two little fishes. He spitted them on sticks and cooked them, eating
them with scones, then lay down in his den and slept.

At noon he woke, the tuainealaich gone from his head, and walked back
into Inverness, and straight down to the river's bank, until he found
the place where he had cut the divot from the grass. The net was gone.
He searched about the bank a while, then sought the house of Saul Mackay
to find he was from home since yesterday.

At Fraser's inn, which he went to next, good trade was doing, and the
wife, returned from Kessock, yoked on him like a vixen for her man's
condition; he was still in bed. She clamoured for her lawing, and
Ninian, like a wise man, paid the reckoning of Æneas and himself—a
trifle, since they paid it daily. Throughout the town he pushed
inquiries for his friend, and was amazed to find the town not much
concerned about a squabble in an inn and settled on the culprits—three
Camerons who had broken stanchions and escaped from a Tolbooth cell.

“There's only one place in the air, or on the earth, or in the deep, or
in the nether-deep can beat this town for roguery, and that's the
Worst!" said Ninian to himself, and having picked a meal, walked out to
Duncan Forbes and told him all.

“Dear me!" said Forbes, “you're looking gash! A body would think to look
at you the North was up. Well, what do you make of it; was it the young
man's money?"

“It looks like that," said Ninian. “And Fraser hired the gang."

“The Tolbooth's not what it should be for security," said Forbes; “but
it's not so ill looked after that a rogue when he likes can pick his
robbers from it like a tenant arling servants at a fair. Ye'll find that
Fraser himself's a victim of the spulzie."

“But, my lord," cried Ninian, “it wasna the Camerons at the inn! At the
very least there were half a dozen—four inside and two at the trammel
net. What's more, the Cameron leash of lads were still in jyle when this
thing happened; they broke out later in the morning."

The Advocate walked the floor, reflecting, and his hands behind him.

“It puzzles me," said he. “It's not in the nature of native theft. Have
you been making enemies?"

“I am always making them, my lord," said Ninian. “It's my trade."

“You talked when I saw you last of a certain gentleman——?"

“The two of us went out and saw him yesterday, my lord."

The Advocate stopped his walk, alarmed. “Good heavens! did ye come on
bones?" said he.

“Not even a shank, my lord," said Ninian. “I was on the wrong scent
altogether. Drimdorran was in Castle Dounie as I said, but he left for
France, and died there."

“Thank God for that!" said Forbes, uplifted greatly. “For a little,
there, ye frightened me!"

“But I found another thing, my lord—who ships the guns."

“Compared with the other thing that's but a trifle," Forbes said,
smiling. “Ye had guessed that much before, and so had I; what proofs
have ye?"

“There's a sloop, the Wayward Lass, at the water-foot, and Pat Grant
of Rothiemurchus is her skipper. He dined wi' Yon One yonder,
yesterday."

“O-ho!" said Forbes, and made for a small 'scretoire where he did his
writing. “The Blackness guns came off his boat; I'll have her searched."

He dashed a letter down with a squeaking quill, cast sand on it and
puffed it off again, and rang a bell and ordered out a messenger.

“And now," said he, “there's your friend to find. The first thing we
should do, I think, is to fetter Mr Fraser."

“He wouldna be the worse of it, my lord," said Ninian. “But that's no'
going to help us. The man's a clever rogue, and has a bonny story.
Yonder he was tied when the alarm broke out that brought the neighbours,
and there's only my word for it that he planned the thing. Wi' a jyle
like Inverness, my lord, that folk can break like an old wife's
henhouse, Fraser's best left in his inn till I get Æneas. Besides, my
lord, I want to keep an eye on him. If Fraser thinks he's lowse, he'll
some night join the others, or they'll come to him, and then I'll have
them all."

Forbes looked at him with comical admiration. “Ye're a great man, Mr
Campbell!" said he. “I wish the like of ye were sold in shops; and I
would order one to cheer me through the winter. I wonder when I'll get
the bottom of your quirks! What, now, is the genuine reason for your
wishing me to take no steps immediately with Fraser? Ye may as well
confess, because I know it."

The beachdair flushed.

“I might have kent ye would, my lord," said he with some chagrin.
“There's not much hid from you."

“Not when it comes to the Hielan' heart," said Forbes complacently, and
gave in English a Gaelic proverb—“What the heather kens the ling
knows."

“The truth, my lord, is that Macmaster was not seized last night for
money."

“Now we're getting at it!" said the Advocate. “Not to beat about the
bush—ye were at Lovat, whom I warned ye to keep clear of. Did ye rouse
him?"

“Indeed he's not in love wi' me, my lord; he knows now that I know his
merchant trade and have some news for Islay. I did a silly thing, my
lord, last night, when I told him we were leaving Inverness this
morning: I could have bit my tongue out all this day to think o't. The
men that shot the net for us last night were Lovat's, and he got the
Camerons lowsed from jyle to blind the scent."

“I wish we had your like in Inverness!" said Forbes with honest feeling.
“Many a bafflement ye could have saved me. Where did ye get your
cunning?"

“Where but with my folk—my poor own people, driven from their holds and
hunted like the otter. Get you out in the mist, my lord, and be its
child, without a name, and every name against you, and your wits must
ward your head. There's not a quirk of man I canna fathom!"

He said it with a passion, and no sooner did than laughed.

“Ye'll be thinking to yourself, my lord," said he, “that I'm a boaster.
That's what my daughter Jennet says. It was not altogether in the old
Macgregor days I learned my wisdom—yon's the place for schooling—real
Argyll! It's on the lowland border, and I get both kinds of wickedness
to try my hands on."

“You have a daughter then?" said Forbes, with seeming interest.

“Would I be what I am but for a daughter, sir? My heart is in the
wilds!"

Forbes, sitting at the desk, looked at him with a curious smile, half
mocking and half sad. “I know, Mr Campbell!" he said. “I know! I
thoroughly understand! The hearts of all of us are sometimes in the
wilds. It's not so very long since we left them. But the end of all that
sort of thing's at hand. The man who's going to put an end to it—to
you, and Lovat, and to me—yes, yes, to me! or the like of me, half fond
of plot and strife and savagery, is Wade. . . . I wish ye took a dram;
we could meet each other better upon this. . . . Ye saw the Road? That
Road's the end of us! The Romans didna manage it; Edward didna manage
it; but there it is at last, through to our vitals, and it's up wi' the
ell-wand, down the sword! . . . It may seem a queer thing for a law
officer of the Crown to say, Mr Campbell, but I never was greatly taken
wi' the ell-wand, and man, I liked the sword! At least it had some
glitter."

“I'm with you there, my lord!" said Ninian heartily. “And that's another
thing to find—my father's sword, Grey Colin, for the devils took it."

The Advocate took up a knife and started cutting at a pen.

“That's a pity," said he. “It served ye well down yonder at Loch
Laggan."

“My lord!" said Ninian.

The other chuckled.

“And they thought they drowned ye, did they?"

“Leggatt has been talking sir, I see," said Ninian.

“Nothing of the kind, sir! I got my tidings elsewhere. Leggatt never
mentioned ye: he fathered both your skirmish and your finding of the
guns."

“That's what I expected of the bonny man!" said Ninian.

“But let us get back to business," Forbes went on more briskly; “what
has happened to your friend? I'm sure you have some notion."

Ninian took the piece of net out from his pocket. “I canna tell ye that,
my lord," he said, “but they had him at the water-side where I found
mysel' this morning. When I got lowse of the net, I cut a clod that I
might know the spot in daylight, and I cut this bit of net that I might
ken the trammel if I saw't again. I went back to-day, and the net was
gone as I expected. They had a boat, either to cross the river or go
down it, and Æneas was in the boat——"

“Or maybe in the river," said Forbes gloomily.

“No, not in the river, sir; at least they didna drown him: that I'm sure
of. Ye see, my lord, if death had been their plan, they would have
drowned mysel'; they had me there as helpless as a log, and I'm more in
the road of Yon One than Macmaster. They wanted us without a
mess—without a clabber of bloodshed—if ye follow; their whole
contrivance in the inn showed that, and even the net itself. My lord,
they've got him planted somewhere! The only thing that bothers me is
this—whose blood was on the bank?"

“Blood!" said Forbes.

“Ay, blood!" said Ninian, “and plenty of it! I tracked it through the
close, and there it's on the bank, a puddle."

“This is most desperate!" said Forbes.

“I hope it's not so desperate as it looks at first, my lord; I'm in the
hopes it's the blood of a man I kittled in the ribs wi' little Colin. Ye
see, when they were on the stair I got a skelp at them. I reason it out
like this, my lord: their boat was small, and there were many of them.
Wi' Æneas perhaps to struggle wi'—for he's a dour one—and a wounded
man to carry, they hadna room for me, so they tied me up, put off, and
landed them in some place, then came back for me. And a bonny chase they
gave me! It was over the walls and through the kail for Ninian, like
Hallowmas."

Forbes stood up and his teeth went snap like a rat-trap. “We'll get
him!" said he. “We'll get him, if I have to card the North like wool for
him!"

“That's what I was thinking to mysel'," said Ninian, “but——"

Forbes seized him by the collar of his coat, and looked through slits of
eyes at him. “And now," said he, “what for did ye let me think at first
it was just a robbery of Fraser's? Eh? . . . Did ye think I wasna to be
trusted to set justice on Lord Lovat?"

“The man's your friend, my lord," said Ninian; “I meant to carry this
thing through and find the lad mysel'. It's ill to draw the sword
against a neighbour that ye've drank wi', and I have never supped his
cup. . . . Ye better leave this to me, my lord; I'm on the slot
already."

“Nay, nay!" said Forbes, “give me that piece of net! My drinking never
spoiled my sense of duty. . . . Where are ye staying now?"

“In your lordship's grounds," said Ninian composedly.

“My grounds!"

“Not here, sir, but the Bunchrew wood, a bit behind your house." It was
an appanage of the Forbes' property, nine miles away. “I fished the
Bunchrew burn, a boy, and minded of a hollow in an eas where I could
shelter."

“Good heavens, man! ye're not in woods?" cried Forbes, astounded.

“Where better, my lord? It's there a man can sleep and no worse than
himself for company. In Inverness I have not got one friend except
yourself."

“Oh yes, ye have!" said Forbes, with great amusement. “I wish that ye
were shaved. Come this way, Mr Campbell, and I'll show ye."

He led him from the room, along a lobby, tapped upon a door, and opened
it, and pushed him in, and shut it after him. A girl in the room stood
up.

“In the name of God!" cried Ninian, “what art thou doing here?"

It was his daughter, Janet.




CHAPTER XXI.

JANET.


She was neither white nor rosy, but a dusk that the sun and wind had
dyed her, and her hair like autumn breckans. On a street he might have
passed her as a stranger. The clothes she wore were new to her—a camlet
riding-coat, and a three-cock hat that let her tresses wander. But more
of the unusual was in her mien; though her eyes were dark with
weariness, he felt in her a fire. And she had aged a little.

He might have seemed more strange to her than she to him, for she had
never seen him hitherto in Gaelic habit nor unshaven, and she hung a
moment, dubious, when he entered, this man stained and kilted, with the
stubble on his chin; then ran to him, and put her arms about his neck
and kissed him.

“A chiall, mo chridhe!" said her father, staggered, “what is wrong?"
She had not kissed him since she was a child. For the first time he felt
old and knew she was at last a woman. She felt at his arms: her eyes
devoured him.

“Oh!" she cried, “I could scarcely credit Mr Forbes that you were
living! A part of me is drowned in Laggan. I'll never hear its name
again but I will shiver, nor drink water but I'll grue!"

“In the name of fortune!" he cried out, “did you hear of that in
Inveraray?"

“Hear it!" she said, and sank into a chair, and threw her arms upon a
table. “My grief! I heard it! I have been hearing it on every breeze of
wind and every spout of water. I can hear it now—Drimdorran's daughter
at our door, and her voice a sword—'Your father has been drowned! Your
father has been drowned!'"

“Not one word of truth in it!" said Ninian stoutly, “we werena drowned a
bit! I'm sure ye might have kent it; hadn't I the Virgin nut?"

He could not have said anything more certain to command her calm; at
that ridiculous speech she looked at him, surprised out of her passion,
and she smiled.

“You foolish man!" said she, “you have not got it!"

“Indeed and I have!" said he, and started feeling in his pockets with a
face that lengthened.

She held the nut out to him in her hand. “There it is," she said. “I
took it from your pocket on the day you left—a foolish prank I've rued
in bitterness for a hundred-and-thirty miles."

He grimaced drolly. “No wonder I had bother! I might have kent the luck
was wanting. Did I not think I had it always in my oxter? Who brought
the news to Inveraray?"

“The first one was a man named Macdonnell, of the Watch of Barisdale. He
came to Duncanson, and Duncanson was in his bed, an ailing man, and sent
to me his daughter."

“What!" cried her father, “a man of Barisdale's! Out wi' the string!"

He plucked from his sporran the tangled line, and with quick fingers
cleared another yard of it. It looked as if he had forgot her presence.
His eyes were glowering at the hank; he pricked it with his knife, and
teased it with his fingers; gave little mocking laughs, and all the time
she waited patiently without a question. That was the way of Janet—she
could always wait; she knew that most things are at last explained if we
have patience.

“Drimdorran was the Big One!" he exclaimed. “And I was blind!"

She waited, silent.

“I'm beginning to see things! He lettered his cousin in Breadalbane; his
cousin sent out Niall of Succoth and the Macintyre we met among the
corries; the Macintyre passed on the word to Barisdale. . . . What sort
of man do you think is Duncanson, my lass?"

“He is that sort of man," said she, “that his hand feels like a puddock
to me."

“I have found him out!"

And still she waited, silent, though his words were all a mystery; she
had never heard of Niall of Succoth, nor of Macintyre, nor of Col's
chase.

“I told ye from the start that Duncanson disliked my errand; now I know
the cause. I clean forgot he was a friend of Lovat's; all Lovat's
correspondence wi' Lord Islay and the Duke goes through his hands. I'll
swear he knew who broke the Road and trafficked in the guns. He's
playing double—one hand in MacCailein's pouch, the other in the sporran
of the North. That's the reason for his putting check on me till he
could warn Lord Lovat of my coming. But Lovat didna hear from him in
time; he had no letters for a fortnight. It takes a gey long time for
letters to come over Corryarrick."

“I'm glad I did not come that way," said Janet. “You are the strange
father that finds me here four days' distance from my home and never
asks me how I came."

He looked at her sideways, shrugging. “I did not need to ask," said he,
“because I knew whenever I saw ye. What could ye wiser do, with your
father drowned in Badenoch, than make for Duncan Forbes? You are wearing
there a riding-coat of Annabel-Alain-Iain-Alain Og's. I saw it once
before, on the day she went on her marriage-jaunt,—that means ye
borrowed a horse from her man and rode. Ye were not your father's child
if ye did not ride with fury, and where could ye better ride than on the
Road? Four days? Ye went, I'll wager, through Glen Dochart down to
Taymouth—a couple of days and fairly easy; from Taymouth on the road to
Ruthven; from Ruthven here—two more."

“A good two more!" she cried, “at forty miles apiece! Do you think I am
made of iron?"

“Na!" said he, with pride in her, “of steel! Small are your bones, my
dear, but in them there's Macgregor marrow."

“Indeed, and that was just the road I came," said she. “I slept last
night at Ruthven, and oh, but I'm tired! tired!"

“Nobody ever died of that, brave lass! Take you a little sleep. Ye
werena frightened, were ye?"

“Of what?" she asked, astonished. “Of Gaelic people! There was
kindliness, in every face I met, for me!"

“It's good to be a woman, sometimes. And forbye, ye had the nut."

At that she laughed. And then she turned him round and felt his
garments, twitching at the belt that held the dirk unseen behind his
loins.

“You look like a wild man of the cairns," said she.

“And a man of the cairns is Ninian, I'll assure ye! My home's the gully,
and my bed the moss. I'll tell ye later on the reason. That town inbye
is not the place for me; there's not much sleep in it. So I've taken my
quarters elsewhere, in the woods of Bunchrew."

“I was just going off to the town to look for you," said Janet. “It's
less than an hour since I came here."

“Ye couldna have come at a better time to help me. But tell me this—you
say the man of Barisdale was first to bring the story; was there, then,
a second?"

“There was. That very day a man reached Duncanson with letters from
Corryarrick."

Her father stared at her.

“Letters from Corryarrick! Who told ye that?"

“The man himself—a soldier. I heard he had come, and hoped for better
news of you, so I sought him out, but got no consolation there; he said
there was no doubt about your drowning; he had seen the very boat."

“And his letters were there before ye left?"

“The day before: he came at midday."

“And Duncanson didna give ye any?"

“No," said she.

He stood before her, stunned, and rubbing his hands together till the
palms were creaking. His breast was raging.

“Oh God of Grace!" he said at last in Gaelic, “isn't that the swine of
his father's pig-stye! . . . Stop thou, Drimdorran! I will make ye pay
for this!"

“I thought you would have written," said his daughter. “It is all a
cloud to me."

“There's never a cloud but what will lift. There's a cloud about
yourself this day I canna fathom. What's wrong wi' ye?"

Her hand went to her breast; her eyes showed perturbation.

“What is't?" said he, suspicious.

“Only that I'm tired."

“Na, na!" said he, “it's not the flesh; it's something in you! I canna
make it out; ye're different. I left ye there at home a girl, and now
ye're like a woman with her fate pursuing. Ye have not even asked me
where's my friend."

“What friend?" she asked, in a small soft voice that stammered.

“My grief! Aren't you the stupid girl! What friend but Æneas! You knew
he was to join me."

“And I know he did," said she, “and so did everybody else; the man who
brought your horse from Bridge of Orchy told us."

“Well? Well?" he urged.

She said nothing at all, but turned her side to him, and looking in a
glass, made trim her hair. It baffled him.

“Ye know the lad was with me and ye never breathe his name. There's
something sly about ye, but I'll find the reason yet."

And still she never answered, busy with her hair.

“If we werena drowned in Laggan we were very near it; and I was a dead
man otherwise but for that callow lad's wee pistol."

“Where is he?" she plumped out, turning from the glass.

“It's high time ye were asking! And now that ye've asked I canna tell
ye," said her father, and laid before her all the past night's
happenings.

Her face that was dusk before with warmth in it, was now like morning
ashes. “And you let them take him!" she cried out. “My shame on you! He
went away with you, and what will folk think of it? Who were they who
took him?"

“Who but Lovat's ruffians? But I'll get him!"

She burst out in a temper that astonished. “You'll get him! A night has
passed and you have not got him yet. Mo naire on you, my father! You
took the lad in keeping and you've lost him like a button."

“Toot-toot!" he said, amazed at her, “and this is the child I skelped!
You are clean worn off your feet. I'll find the lad, if he's dead or
living."

“Dead or living!" she cried out, all trembling. “Unless you find him
living you need never go to Inveraray. In that place they would bray at
you. I could not . . . I could not face his folk!" She gathered her
cloak about her with a great determination. “I'll look for him myself,"
said she.

“What are ye hiding from me?" said her father.

“I'm going to the inn," said she; “if there's a woman——"

“Ye needna fash wi' the inn," said her father warmly. “I put it through
a riddle and got all that's in it. I thought that ye were tired?"

“Tired!" cried she, in a turmoil of the spirit; “I have tired three
horses, and I thought myself a wreck, but now there's not one tired bit
in me! If I cannot learn at the inn I'll learn at Lovat's."

She moved to the door. He stopped her.

“A rùin!" he said, “but ye're like your mother; peace be with her and
her share of heaven! I always thought ye had a soft and Saxon bosom, but
I see the red Macgregor's there! What's wrong wi' ye?"

She laughed in his face,—a laugh a little woebegone and taunting.

“And I thought you a clever man!" said she.

“Indeed," said he, “ye're right to blame me! I thought myself as clever
as was going, but I made a bauchle of this business coming by the old
ways north instead of by the Road. I should have taken the Road as you
did. That you should come in four days on a saddle and be none the worse
except in temper is the first thing ever made me think Wade might be
right and the Road turn out a good thing."

“Let us not be talking!" she said, heedless of all this. “The hours are
flying. Have you no idea where is Æneas or what they took him for?"

He had always the tangled line in his hands, and plucked at it with
nervous fingers, absently.

“I can only make a guess," said he, “that Lovat has him."

“Where?" she hurried.

“That's the bit! It's a great big country, Sim's, with many a glen and
hole in it, but my mind will aye be dwelling on the vaults of Castle
Dounie."

“Do you think he's there?" asked Janet, feverish with alarm; Lord
Lovat's vaults were an old theme of her father's.

“At least," said he, “it's the first place to make sure of. And that's
the way I picked on Bunchrew for my lodging. It's well on the road to
Castle Dounie, and as near as I care through day to venture."

She threw up her hands. “You talk!—and you talk!—and you talk!" said
she, “but you leave me still in darkness. What in the world does he want
with Æneas? What has Æneas done to him?"

“If ye were a wise-like lass ye would have asked that first," he said to
her. “Do you see that hank? There's a verse in every yard of it, like
the cloth that women would be waulking. But it's all a fankle, as ye
see, and I have only got the start of it. Ye've helped me wi't a bit,
and ye'll maybe help me more. It was not only me that Duncanson was
frightened for, but Æneas. He was in fear of Æneas prying round in
Inverness and finding something out about his father. Do ye ken what we
have learned about his father?"

He told her all the story. “And Æneas," said he, “is fair distracted."

“Poor lad!" said she, and her tears were running. “Poor—poor lad!"
Again and again she said “Poor lad!" and aye her tears were falling.

“Just fair worn off your feet!" said her father, with distress,
astonished at this melting.

“How far is it to Dounie?" she asked at last, abruptly.

“Fifteen miles and a bittock."

“Then I'll go out and see Prim Campbell," she said firmly.

“Now ye are talking like my own smart lass!" said her father. “That's
just what I was thinking to myself. But ye'll not can go till morning.
By that time I'll have raked the burgh, and made sure that Æneas is out
of it."

“And what," asked she, “am I to do till morning? I'll go out with you to
Bunchrew."

“Ye canna do that," said he. “It's an inn for single gentlemen I'm in,
and there's no' a looking-glass. But maybe Mr Forbes can help us; stop
you till I see him!"

He went out of the room and came back in a minute or two with Forbes.

“And so you want to fly already," Forbes said to her, and thereupon made
a proposal which would keep her near her father. It was that she should
stay in Bunchrew House kept by his sister. “Indeed," said he, “this
house is a little wae for a girl just now, Miss Campbell; I'm a lee-lone
widower; my brother the laird came home last night a sickly man, and I
doubt it's serious. You'll rest a while, and go to-night on a pad with a
groom to Bunchrew House, where Mary will make you welcome. I have
offered the same convenience to your father, but he'll not hear of it."

“Na, na! my lord," said Ninian firmly. “I'll bed where I can hear the
water brawl. It's like enough that I'll be out all night, but ye'll know
I'm on the road for sleep, if ye hear the cailleach oidhche, Jennet.
But the thing that bothers me now is this—You must see the wife without
the husband if you're to get any news from her, and how can ye manage
that?"

“That's easily arranged," said Forbes with a smile;—“if you make your
call, Miss Campbell, late in the afternoon—his lordship's no longer
young, sleeps ill at night, and always takes, as I know, what he calls a
'good long dover' after dinner. But the lady is something of a recluse;
folk see but little of her."

“She was my foster-sister, sir," said Janet.

“Ah, that I did not know!" said Forbes. “In that case I can enter with a
better grace into your father's plans, feeling sure you will not be
unfair to her husband's interests. We're perhaps a little hasty in
assuming him concerned in this young gentleman's trepanning: I hope it
may turn out an error."

“Deil the bit, my lord!" said Ninian. “'Twas him that did it! I know it
in my bones."

“No wonder you feel things in your bones," said Forbes, “if you sleep on
the side of Bunchrew burn. It's not conviction, Mr Campbell; it's just
damp."

He rallied Ninian on his den till Ninian lost patience and took his
leave, with a promise to see his daughter sometime in the night at
Bunchrew House.




CHAPTER XXII.

BY BUNCHREW BURN.


Next day he sat on the burnside busking lures, for nothing but the fun
of it, since he could get what fish he wanted now by guddling. A dozen
times that morning had he stretched upon the bank and peered down in the
pools to see the sea-trout, lank and ruddy, lying on the gravel. He
rolled his sleeves up, plunged a hand, and gently slid his fingers over
them, then gripped them by the gills and lifted them, to cheep to them
as though they had been pets and stroke their bellies. “Be thou aware,"
he said to them, “of nets! Keep out to sea or well up in the burn among
true gentlemen." And then would he put them back again, unharmed, and
seek another pool.

The morn had come with frost and every sense of him experienced the
change—chill air, the constant patter of falling leaves, a tinkle in
the water, hoar on the grasses, haze among the trees, fresh earthy
smells. For most of the night had he been roaming; a fire was crackling
behind him, and he had made a bed of the Fenian fashion, with brushwood
next the ground, then moss, and a top of rushes. On a stick above the
fire a fish was roasting; he had made an oaten cake from seed he had
plucked down in the valley, singed, and ground with stones. His bonnet
was full of nuts and his face was stained with berries.

It was now late afternoon.

The shilfy piped “fink-fink," and ousels talked among the stones; across
the blue strip of the sky went wild geese southward, calling; there was
no lonesomeness.

Well down the burn below him were great crags conglomerate whence there
rose of a sudden croaking ravens. He dashed for the cave, stamped out
the fire, and waited. A figure moved among the rocks.

It was Duncan Forbes with a terrier at his heels and a gun below his
arm. He looked at the embers, at the cake and fish, the Fenian bed, and
the shaggy beachdair standing in his den, with a whimsical expression.

“I was pitying you, Mr Campbell," said he, “to have no better lodging,
and now I'm in the mood to envy."

“Indeed I might be worse, my lord," said Ninian. “Sit down and take your
breath. . . . Has she come back yet?"

Forbes sat on a boulder. “Yes," said he, “she has come back," and looked
about him. When he had first appeared he was the man of business
although he bore the gun as an excuse for rambling; no sooner had he sat
than something dropped from him—the coldness of restraint, and he
became exceeding natural and human. He had on a crotal coat, a good
deal chafed, and might have been a shepherd. A robin came quite close to
him and looked at him, and chirped a little song.

“Bi falbh!" Ninian said to it in fun,—“Be off!—thou'rt speaking to a
lord, and thou'rt just a wee bit bird!"

“I have not been here," said Forbes, “for fifteen years, and many a
thing has happened since. The climb is steeper, but the place is noway
changed. It's hard that men should age and pass, and the burn and the
rock be constant."

He broke some bread and fish at Ninian's invitation, and drank a drink
of water. “Ah," said he, “if we could aye be young, and shun the world,
and go a-fishing!"

“What way's your brother, my lord?" asked Ninian.

“Poor John! Poor John! He'll never again see Bunchrew burn. We fished it
both as laddies; what things have happened since to make that time seem
gold! What is gladness, Ninian? It is to be simple, to be innocent, to
think all men are good, and to be a boy, at fishing. But that's all bye
wi't now; eheu fugaces, Postume labuntur."

“That's just what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian. “Ye're capital
at the Gaelic!"

Forbes smiled at this expression of erroneous politeness. “Men pass,"
said he, “and old estates. I wish we could aye bide boys at
fishing. . . . That's a braw lass of yours, Mr Campbell."

“Ay, and a brave!" said Ninian, eating. “But just now she's not herself.
I'm beat to understand her."

“She's naturally put about for young Macmaster."

“No word of him?" asked Ninian quickly.

“Not a whisper! Wherever he is he's not out there, and she is much
concerned. I never saw a girl more stricken."

“God knows," said Ninian, “what is wrong with her! She gives me the
notion of something hidden, and before, that girl was clear as glass."

“I thought her, myself," said Forbes, “as artless as a bird, as frank's
a flower. It was easy to guess her secret; she wore it on her sleeve."

“On her sleeve?" said Ninian sharply; “I never noticed. What is it?" And
Forbes laughed.

“That's what I'm not going to tell," said he. “I'll leave it to the
beachdair to find out for himself. . . . But now, Mr Campbell, let us
come to business. I want you to come down to the house to see your
daughter, but first I'll tell you what has happened—part for your
information, part to redd up things confused a little to myself. She
went out to Castle Dounie, as you bade her, and saw her ladyship. It
seems she's ailing, and unhappy. Lovat, as I guessed, was at his doze,
and I think your girl did marvellously to find out all she learned in
the time at her command. He had been out the last two nights till
late—you see I tell you all without reserve. But the lad is not at
Castle Dounie—her ladyship made sure of that. And now, for the first
time, through your daughter, Mr Campbell, I get some inkling of the
state of things 'twixt Lovat and his wife, which hitherto I might
suspect but had no proofs of. I am sorry to say she loathes him."

“And well, my lord, she might!" said Ninian.

“You see I met the lady only once since they were married, and from his
lordship's air I had no reason to suspect domestic trouble. With his
former wife, in spite of the curious way he got her, he was all that one
could wish for. I had the opportunities to see them often, and I'm
satisfied they lived for long not ill-content together. Lovat has some
gracious parts; in that rough carcass there's at times a charm that
masters reason. Lord Islay and the Duke have often spoke to me of this
peculiar quality in him, as if God meant him for a seraph to begin with,
and in a whimsy filled him up with clods."

“I ken his history!" said Ninian, contemptuous.

“Yes, yes! We all know that. And yet, with those who knew him best,
there has aye been hope that Simon would amend and be a good man for his
country. He has long since passed the age of storm and folly; his aims
have been attained; he has as much of power as man need ask for; he
suffers from a stone, and must bethink sometimes that death looms. I've
had him weeping to me for his sins, protesting Grace."

“When I will see a bad man greeting, I will aye be snecking up my
sporran," said Ninian.

“I could tell of a thousand generous acts of Lovat's, and his sheltering
of this young man's father fourteen years ago 's in keeping. Such things
as these have made of us his friends in a kind of neutral fashion. I
squirmed a bit myself at his marrying Primrose Campbell; it was not only
age and youth, but it was policy, and I'm loth to see a girl put on a
ring for policy. Yet I thought—we all thought—this connection with
Argyll would keep him straight."

He took the terrier on his knees and clapped it, thinking, with his low
lip jutting.

“It hasna! That's the long and the short of it. I've got news to-day,
through your daughter, sir, that makes me sick of human nature. His
wife, before she married him, had never realised his character, and she
was, in a measure, forced to it by her people. Indeed, let us not make
bones about it—she was forced completely! Since ever she came to him
she has been confronted with evidence of his duplicity, for he's at
times a foolish Machiavelli who brags of his own designs. Now she
regards herself as sold to bondage; she is bitter with her folk, but
bitterest of all with Alexander Duncanson."

“I'm finding out," said Ninian, “that he's a droll one, Sandy."

“You know that Lovat has been mentioned in the Grange affair? Last year
Lord Grange would seem to have got sick of Lady Grange—indeed I'm not
surprised at it, for I have seen and heard her to my sorrow!—and she
was bundled up one night in Edinburgh, carted over Forth by Hielandmen,
and lost to sight since then. The men who thus kidnapped her were, to
all appearance, Frasers and Macleods, and Lovat's friendship with Lord
Grange gave this a bad complexion. I ventured one time to inform Lord
Lovat what was said, and he denied it to the blackest."

“I'll wager ye that, my lord!" said Ninian.

“And all this time—since her very day of marriage, his wife knows that
he's guilty—that he planned and lent his men for the trepanning! I have
never had the honour to meet your Mr Duncanson, but he seems to be a
gentleman worth watching. A week before the wedding there was sent to
Lord Islay by some enemy of Lovat's, proofs of his lordship's part in
the Grange affair—a letter written by himself in a freakish mood to
some one in these parts. That letter, had it reached Lord Islay, would
have stopped the wedding. But he never got it. Your Mr Duncanson, who
seems to have a sense of drollery as curious as his notion of his duty,
despatched it to Lord Lovat as his wedding gift."

“My goodness! Is not that the ruffian!" cried Ninian.

“There were, I regret to say, two ruffians in this," said Forbes. “I
might in course of time forgive Lord Lovat for his helping Grange to put
the seas between himself and one who was a drunken targe, but I never
could pardon him for showing his wife that letter. There are some sins,
Mr Campbell, that I doubt if even the Blood will purge, and this, I
fear, is one of them. It has turned her, as your daughter says, to ice."

“I knew he was bad to her!" said Ninian. “'Twas that that roused me."

“Bad?—yes, in the lousiest fashion—that's in being a bad man to
himself; but this is what makes her position hopeless. I compliment you
on your daughter, Mr Campbell; she surely has her father's art, for she
has squeezed the last drop from the situation. Lady Lovat either will
not, or can not, do anything to help herself. He has never once been
harsh with her nor failed in public or in private in a certain courtesy.
But he wounds her none the less; his very presence is to her a blow. Not
much matter for indictment there, now, is there, Mr Campbell? And
another thing—there is her pride. It seems there's to be a family, and,
now that shackle 's on, she darena move."

“Oh man! for a while I thought I had him!" Ninian said with sorrow.

“I wish you had!" said Forbes with feeling. “For I'm in this position
that I can do nothing, even in the Grange affair or in the guns; I have
no real evidence in either case. And I have entered into this long
harangue, Mr Campbell, because I look to you to help me otherwise. It's
forced on me, my friend, that the place for you just now is not in the
shire of Inverness at all but in Inveraray."

“That's just what I was thinking to myself, my lord," said Ninian. “If I
could just find Æneas!"

“This Duncanson of yours is full of interest to me. I say so to you
freely since your daughter, who is most discreet, cannot conceal her
feelings to that gentleman, and you, it seems, agree."

He pushed the terrier off his knees and shifted on his seat a little
nearer to the other, fixing him with serious eyes, and speaking with
great earnestness.

“I begin to think," said he, “that some leakages of late of governmental
plans affecting us may have had their origin in Lord Islay's secretary.
This is not an instruction to the musicians, mind ye, Mr Campbell; it's
just a hint. That Duncanson should have sent on that letter to Lord
Lovat at a cost so great for poor Prim Campbell, of itself looks
sinister. Our old friend, out the way there, has, sometimes, a charm, as
I was saying, and it's possible he may have charmed that gentleman. I
can conceive of nothing more advantageous to Lord Lovat than that he
should have a faithful private correspondent in the household of Argyll.
You gave me a clew yourself, though I did not at the time quite see it,
when you told me Barisdale had blocked you. I happen to know that
Barisdale's affairs are much embarrassed, and that Lovat and your friend
have both got bonds on his estate."

“Just that!" said Ninian, and ducked his head. “I'm getting on, my lord!
Keep you on wi' your story; I could hearken to that tale of you beside a
fire until a stack of peats was burned."

“In these circumstances, Barisdale may very well have been acting in
your Mr Duncanson's behoof."

“He was, my lord!" said Ninian. “There's not a doubt of it. I wondered
whatna grip he had on Col."

“So much for that! But now there's another point I owe to your
daughter's talk with her old companion. It seems you were well received
at Castle Dounie till the post came in?"

“That's so, my lord!" cried Ninian eagerly. “I'm listening."

“There was something in that post that startled Lovat,—so his lady
says, and she is anxious, for Miss Janet's sake, to help so far's she
can to find Macmaster. I am inclined now to share your confidence that
the lad was lifted by his lordship's orders, and I am mighty curious to
know why. Here now present themselves two possibilities—one that
Lovat's change of key and his presumptive capture of Macmaster and
attack on both of you arose from mere resentment at your interference in
the business of the guns; the other that he had got some disquieting
intelligence from Duncanson that called for drastic measures."

“Did Jennet no' have the sense to ask if there was word from Inveraray?"
Ninian blurted.

“She did," said Forbes. “There was! A letter of Duncanson's. Whatever it
was about it stirred up Simon strangely. In Lovat's ire with you, or in
that letter, lies the motive for those singular proceedings at the inn.
The motive is, I think, more like to be in the latter than the former,
for Lovat is not the man to go to such extremities of revenge on the
head of a pickle guns, and he knows you have no proofs as yet against
him. I'd give a groat or two to ken what's in that letter!"

He said so with great warmth, and then drew up a bit, as if ashamed that
a crotal coat, and a burnside, and a beachdair listener should so
much unbend him. “What are you fiddling at?" he said in a different key,
for Ninian was twitching at a string.

“A tangled hank, my lord!" said Ninian slyly. “Ye mind I told ye that a
line had aye two ends to it, and that I never tugged, but teased it?
What am I at, my lord, but at the teasing? The snow's on Wyviss Ben this
morning—I could smell it! Before it's melted I'll have cleared my
line!"

He started scattering the ashes of the fire; took out his bedding from
the nook and threw it in the burn; tied up his garters tightly; scrugged
his bonnet. Forbes watched him, curious.

“My father's people never left an ash," said Ninian, “but all of
Gaeldom's grey with their smothered fires. Only the weasel kens their
dust in woods; we never left a stick! . . . Clan Alpine! Clan Alpine! Ye
hear me in Balwhidder? Nor fire will Ninian light, nor sleep in bed, nor
loose a latchet till he finds him young Macmaster!"

So saying, loudly, in a fervour of the spirit, he took up the dirk and
held it by its blade before his mouth, and put upon its haft his lips.

“And now, my lord," said he, “I'm ready. Let us go."




CHAPTER XXIII.

NIGHT-LADS.


As they were making down the burn for Bunchrew, Forbes withdrawn into
himself, and to a mood less free and confidential by that heathen burst
which showed how great the difference between himself and that rough
spirit only varnished with decorum, they were, at a point well down,
among blown timber, brought to a standstill by a whistle. It mocked the
curlew's call that is a voice tuned to the wilderness, a plaint from
days gone by, but Forbes, who was a hunter, missed some cadence; Ninian
knew it in a moment for a signal. It came from edges of a thicket to
their left, in which the mist of frost seemed tangled with the branches.

“Mark whaup, my lord!" said Ninian, like a beater.

Forbes, with the impulse of a sportsman, raised his gun, then smiling at
himself, restored it to his elbow.

“What bairns," said he, “we are of custom! That's no wheeple of the
whaup. What is it, Ninian?"

“I'll soon can tell ye that!" the other said. “Lend me the gun a
minute."

He fired it in the air; the gorge roared with the sound that echoed, and
re-echoed, clanging back from cliffs like waves from off a headland.
“I'll give them every chance," said he; “I never yet shot hare
a-sitting," and throwing down the gun left Forbes and dashed up to the
thicket.

“Come back! Come back!" cried Forbes.

“Devil the back!" he shouted, furious, and climbed the brae. “Come you
up with the gun behind, and see it's loaded."

He disappeared into the wood.

Forbes charged his gun afresh and followed. He had not reached the trees
when Ninian came out, his dirk drawn in his hand. “They're off!" said he
as he sheathed it. “I got but the one wee glimpse of them."

“Put that away, sir, on the moment!" said the other, panting. “Who were
they?"

“Who were they but the mischief's own!" said Ninian dryly. “Three men
running like the wind, as if their hour was after them. It's good we had
our lady friend the musket. That's three, my lord, that have been
tracking me since I left Inverness last night. I saw them on the bridge;
I heard them in the dark behind me; I saw them on the moor again this
morning. I'm thinking now it's time that I was out of Bunchrew. To the
Worst Place wi' MacShimi! That arrant rascal needs a scaffolding. . . .
But nothing to my daughter, sir, about this business! It would put her
much about to know that I was followed."

They hurried down the brae as fast as they could walk, and all the way
down Ninian revealed his mind upon the meaning of events whereof the
other had part knowledge only.

“It's all against my friend," said he. “I thought at first I was the
cause of it, but now I see I'm only in't because I'm in his company, and
maybe ken too much. The whole thing's centred in a desk in Inveraray."

“Every mischief nowadays is farrowed in a desk," said Forbes. “But what
is this one?"

Ninian told him all about Macmaster's tutoring; the sudden end to it;
the wrath of Duncanson; the charge of theft; the part of Margaret; and
last of all, the strange complexion given to these things by their
discovery that Duncanson for fourteen years had kept the truth of Paul
Macmaster's end a secret.

“It's nigh beyond belief!" cried Forbes.

“Beyond belief!" said Ninian bitterly. “The only quirk in life beyond
belief is that a man could take the breeks off him by pulling them over
his head. I'm too long at the beachdair business to be amazed at
anything else. Your lordship's right about the letters to Lord Lovat; it
was the one he got from Inveraray put him to his tricks. There was that
in Sandy's desk, whatever it was, that made old Simon partner in some
left-hand business both of them would wish kept dark. They think that
Æneas saw it, but he didna."

“I'm more convinced than ever that the place for you is Inveraray,"
Forbes said warmly.

“I'll go when I get the lad," said Ninian. “But not an hour before, if
it was till Nevermas!"

“I have twenty men at search to-day," said Forbes. “I doubted all along
he was at Dounie."

“Since Jennet made sure of that I know now where he is," said Ninian;
and took from his pouch a piece of cord, quite fresh, that smelled of
tar. “The three birds that I flushed up there had a bit of a nest among
the breckan, and left this piece of marling. They meant to tie up
Ninian, and they're men that use the sea."

“Ah-ha!" said Forbes.

“The thing is now as plain to me as print. They had a boat to bring them
up the town; they had a net——"

“I know about the net," said Forbes. “It was lifted from a barking-house
at Kessock, and found next morning on the beach with your bit out of
it."

“Sin thu fhéin, a bhalaich!—Well done yourself, my lord!" cried
Ninian. “That shows they werena fishers. Between the pair of us and God
we'll get him yet! The ship escaped my mind till I got this bit marling.
And now I see that the time they left me lying on the bank in trammel
was just time for them to reach the Wayward Lass behind two oars, and
ship my friend, and hurry back for Ninian."

“There's much to be said for your interpretation," Forbes said quickly,
“and for once I have forestalled you. I got the sheriff to send out an
officer to search the brig to-day more carefully. The men I sent out
yesterday assured themselves she had no guns, except a handful kept in
the skipper's cabin for his private use, and these the fools distrained
as if he had been poinded. We'll have to send them back and eat the
leek. The papers of Captain Grant were all in order, and he had a quite
good tale. He frankly said he had shipped some arms from Holland; they
were on his manifest, consigned to a man in Leith."

“But they were landed at Blackness!" cried Ninian.

“Just so! Of course the man is lying, but his story's quite complete,
coiled up and flemished down, as he would say himself in his tarry way.
The man at Leith, he says, paid extra freight to send them farther up
the frith. . . . No, no, Mr Campbell, we may have got the guns, but
we're not going to find it easy to get pouther in the way of proof that
Lovat shipped them. No loophole of discovery's been overlooked."

“I don't give a docken, my lord, about the guns at present; for that
affair more proofs can be got at leisure. What bothers me is young
Macmaster. Did your men no' see a sign of him?"

“No," said Forbes, “but then they were not seeking him. It only occurred
to me to-day when I heard of the net at Kessock that he might be on the
brig that's lying off it, so I got the officer sent out to see, and he's
coming to Bunchrew later on to tell me how he fares."

“Capital!" said Ninian, and hurried on.

They were in Bunchrew House two hours before he saw his daughter,
though. Worn out by travel and distress of mind, and dashed exceedingly
by what had been disclosed at Castle Dounie, she had gone to rest on the
imperative command of Forbes's sister.

“The lass is fair foundered," said that lady to the father, looking at
him through great horn-rimmed specs; “ye've made a bonny hash of it, my
man!"

“What way?" said Ninian.

“What way!" she snapped indignantly. “What way, but losing a fine young
man? Good kens there's no' that many in the country, and it's me that
knows! Trailing an honest lad through all the ruffian parts of Scotland
on your dirty errands—fie shame on ye!"

Ninian shrugged, and turned his bonnet in his hand like an errand boy.
He looked at Forbes, and Forbes took snuff, with a helpless kind of
pawky smile for both of them.

“Come, come, Mary!" said he, “you're very hard on Mr Campbell."

“'Deed no!" said Ninian heartily. “She's just splendid! Dirty work is
the word for it, though it wasna me that made the dirt, Miss Forbes; I'm
just a scafenger that must be there when the king whistles. And there's
every word of truth in what ye say, me'm; Æneas was better had he never
met me."

“At any rate," said she, less tart, “I'll not have your lass disturbed
till she is rested. . . . Ye'll take a bite?"

“Not one morsel, me'm!" said Ninian. “I thank ye."

“Dear me!" said she. “What do the Macgregors live on?"

“On anything that's going, me'm. They're like the herring of the sea
that can live on the foam of their own tails."

“Poor feeding for a girl! I canna get that lass of yours to pick a
decent meal. Oh me! but ye've made a mess of it! . . . Duncan, give the
man a dram."

And away she sailed, all rustling, and left them to themselves. To
Ninian it seemed eternity before she came to cry him up the stair.

“There's she's wakened now," said she; “and for good sake, man, be
gentle wi' her!"

It was a daughter woebegone for Primrose Campbell, and sharing all his
rage with Lovat, Ninian found. She made him sit before her and tell
everything afresh that bore, or seemed to bear, in the flimsiest degree
on Æneas's disappearance; sifted the smallest meal of facts himself had
thrashed and ground; the strange transforming power of some new passion
made her shrewder than himself.

“You're all astray!" she said at last to him. “My dear old father! my
dear old father! you're all astray—you and your bits of string!"

“I'm not so very old as that," said he with some vexation. “What way am
I astray?"

“Because you chase two deer instead of, wise-like, one. A two-deer dog
will never bring down either. First it's Lovat with you, then it's
Duncanson; finish off with the one before you chase the other."

He looked delighted at her; patted her on the shoulder.

“Ye're a clever lass," said he. “I'm proud of ye! Indeed, a two-deer dog
is not much good at hunting, and I was the two-deer dog too long, but I
couldna help it. But that's all by wi'—Sim's affair is settled and off
my mind, and now I'm on the race for Duncanson."

“It's from the start you should have thought of that," said she.
“Lovat's but his tool."

“How ken ye that?" he asked her.

“How do I ken?" she cried. “A woman's kenning. If a man has a wall to
scale he must go up a ladder; a woman jumps."

“I would like to see ye at the jumping, Jennet!" said her father.

“I mean a wall of the wits," said she. “You are hanging on your ladder
rungs and I'm already over; Duncanson is meaning Æneas's destruction."

“Tach!" said he, “ye never had a madder notion. For what should he
destroy him?"

“I feel it!" she said; “I know it! Duncanson will stop at nothing."

She spoke like one who knew things that presaged disaster.

“He will stop at that at any rate," said her father. “I'll get the lad
before the morn's morning."

“Where?" she asked, a flush across her face.

He told her what led Forbes and him to their belief that Æneas was on
the brig.

“What could they want with him there?" said she.

“Ship him off abroad," said Ninian; “the thing's quite common."

“Abroad?" she stammered. “Where?"

“Where, but to Virginia—to the plantations! Many a body Sim sent there.
Ye see, my lass, he's like a king in this regality. He has the power of
pit and gallows, and to sell a lad to slavery would bother Sim no more
than selling heifers at a fair. He doesna keep them now in vault and
salt; he gets so much a head for them upon the hoof. The thing's against
the law, of course; he hasna got the right of transportation, but he
drives a bargain—either transportation or the tree, and who would
choose the tree? In this case Duncan Forbes will have a word to say; I'm
looking every minute for a man he sent to search."

She trod the floor like a creature caged; again he felt some secret in
her, and he scanned her sleeves, but nothing was to see there that
accounted for a spirit so unusual in Janet.

The night was drawing in with suddenness: it dimmed the room. He walked
up to the window and looked out. Below him was a garden bounded to the
east and west by tall old trees; ahead were shallow terraces, with paths
between, which ended at a wall, beyond which lay a great wide stretch of
sand, whereon, far off, the tide was breaking. Big clouds were piling on
the distant hills; the frith was black; the sands were so immense and
desolate they gave a dowie aspect to the scene, that further saddened
when a gust of wind shook through the garden and filled all the air with
leaves.

He turned away from it, to find her standing at his elbow looking out
too at the prospect.

“My grief!" said he, “it looks like the start of winter."

“Winter!" she said, and shivered. She leaned against the wall, her head
upon her wrists, and burst in tears.

“Good God!" cried he in Gaelic, “what is wrong?"

“Winter!" she said, sobbing. “It will make things different. I hate to
think of winter."

“What!—God's own winter!" he cried out, astonished. “Beloved Scotland
of the winter and the hills! 'Tis little that thou'lt get from them, but
they will make thee hard and brave!"

He was all aback at these strange gusts in her; about her waist he put
an awkward arm and soothed her. “Poor lass!" said he, “poor lass! Indeed
it is a bleak night and a bleak land; I wish that we were yont the Spey
again, and all was well with Æneas Macmaster."

As if she could no more contain herself, she struggled free and darted
from the room.

To him the house was quite unknown; it was not very large, but rambled
oddly upon different levels, with confusing passages and narrow stairs
that now the dusk made ill to navigate; he went to follow her, and down
a stair as narrow as a ship's he found himself in kitchen quarters at an
open door. The air blew chilly through it; he looked out on leeks and
kail and berry-bushes. No servant was about to guide him, so he walked
out round a gable-end to reach the entrance whence he better knew his
bearings.

Away out on the ebb were mallards quacking; teals that feed in dark were
screaming; there was no other sound round Bunchrew but the pattering of
leaves from trees that had their feet already in the pools of night
quick-coming like a tide. A bird with a cry of “skaith!" came whirring
from them, low above his head with curious twists and twinings; he
looked towards whence it came and listened with his hands behind his
ears. Beyond the trees a slim young moon was setting.

There was a snap of brushwood, and he moved a little nearer to the door.

A man burst suddenly from underneath the trees and ran to him—a
stout-built fellow with a cane, who looked across his shoulder once or
twice as if he had been followed.

“Ye're in a hurry, lad," said Ninian. “Are ye from the Wayward Lass?"

“Yes," said the officer, “and three men through the wood in chase of
me."

“They're friends of mine who took ye for myself," said Ninian. “Silly
fellows! Say not a word of that inside among the women. Come you away:
his lordship's waiting."

He went in with the man, who, in a sentence, shattered all their hopes.
Æneas was not on board the ship!

“Are you sure of it?" said Forbes, incredulous.

“Not one hair of him is there, my lord!" declared the officer. “We
searched her high and low. The skipper's ashore and half his crew. I
came on a drunken man—a Fraser from Strathglass."

“A man of Lovat's?" queried Forbes.

The officer, who had a broad and honest face, with eyes of darting
penetration, smiled at the question slyly. “I think indeed, my lord, he
was. At least he was no willing passenger, for he was clapped in irons.
A poor young fellow he had stabbed was bedded groaning in a fever."

“Had the man in bed a ruddy whisker?" rapped out Ninian.

“As red's a rasp! Ye could gather a clan wi' him for flambeau."

“Tach!" said Ninian, “that settles it! I'll wager he keeps mind of wee
Grey Colin!"

Miss Forbes, with trembling hands, put on her specs and looked across at
Janet. Ninian looked too, and saw his daughter's face most pitiful. He
was himself far more concerned than he displayed, at this last failure
of his judgment; Forbes could not hide that he was mortified, and stood
without a word, his face beclouded; the girl could not but feel that
they were baffled worse than ever.

“A word wi' ye, my lord," said Ninian at last, and left the room.

The Advocate came after him; they stood out in the lobby.

“That's a bad twist, my lord!" said Ninian.

“Indeed it is!" said Forbes. “We're where we were, and I'm getting
really anxious. I can't conceal from myself that things look far more
gloomy for your friend than I at first imagined. No wonder that your
girl's in such an anguish."

“Can ye tell me, my lord, what ails her? There's nothing of her there I
seem to know."

Forbes cleared his throat. “It's very plain," said he, “that the
beachdair business spoils a man for seeing anything but mischief. It
might occur to you, Mr Campbell, that your daughter has a tender
interest in young Macmaster."

“Is it Jennet?" said Ninian, amazed. “Good lord! she's but a child!"

“She'll never be anything else to you, my man; that's one of the jokes
of nature. But other folk have eyes. I'm wae to see her prostrate this
way, Mr Campbell."

“Whatever o't, she's in the dods wi' me," said Ninian sadly.

“No wonder, when she thinks you let them kill him."

“Na, na, my lord!" said Ninian, with conviction. “He's no' dead; not one
bit of him! They have him planted no' far off, in cleft or cranny, and
I'll get him."

“If you're not to sleep in bed nor loose a lace till you find him, Mr
Campbell, you'll have to be gey and slippy."

Ninian buttoned up his coat. “I know the way to get him, my lord," said
he. “It came to me in a flash in there. There's nothing in your notion
about Jennet and the lad, but still-and-on"—

He moved to the outer door and opened it; dead leaves were whirled into
the lobby by an eddy of the wind, and Forbes gave a shiver of cold; he
had come from a roaring fire.

“—I like the look of your officer, my lord," said Ninian, “he has a
clever eye. It's in the eye of a man ye'll see if he has yon in him,
and this one has it. To look at the wood ye would think there was
nothing in't but crows, and still it's throng wi' mischief. The men I
flushed on the hill are there; they're not done yet wi' Ninian."

“What!" said Forbes, “do you see them?" and came to the doorstep.

“No," said Ninian, “but they're there, as your man can tell ye. Now this
is the way it will be with me—I'll take a daunder."

“Not one step!" said Forbes, alarmed.

“There's no other way, my lord, and not much risk in it. I'll let them
seize me, and your man has but to keep well out of sight and follow."

“It's not a bad idea," Forbes admitted, “but the risk——"

“The only risk, my lord, is that they'll weary waiting on me, or the
moon will hide, and that might spoil it all, so here's furth fortune
wi't and fill the fetters!"




CHAPTER XXIV.

AT THE EBB-TIDE.


Without another word he left the door, and Forbes confounded on its
threshold; gave a turn to the Virgin nut in the bottom of his sporran,
and plucked tight his kilt.

Though he had spoken bravely of the winter to his girl, and truly felt,
for ordinary, some sting in winter that called forth in him the best of
manhood, quicker pulses, keener zests, this end to autumn, earlier than
usual, found him now experiencing that droop of spirits which had sent
his daughter crying. He had not left the door a moment when he felt as
she (he thought) must feel—an eeriness to think of Æneas amissing in
that great cold country. So long as grass was green, while still the
hills were blue, their passes open, and while yet the birds were blithe,
the lad's condition had not seemed so desperate, nor his own research so
hopeless.

And now a hint of winter altered all!

It was as if a door had clashed on Æneas and left him out from light and
warmth till spring, perhaps for ever. So much had happened since they
left their home, that home seemed all at once unreal—the woods of
Inveraray, pleasant gardens, streets well-kent and folk one knew. At
least it seemed an age since they were there and heard the reaper's song
on Cairnbaan. And now, he wondered, where was Æneas? In what hold or
hollow of this dreary land? or looking on it through what chink? in what
sad stress?

Already had his scheme begun to look ridiculous.

When, having left the Advocate irresolute on his doorstep, he went
crunching through the gravel round the lawn and reached the avenue, he
turned and looked behind him at the house in which were lights now
gleaming. Already the place seemed quite indifferent to his quest, and
yet behind these black high walls he knew were fear and speculation. He
seemed, himself, shut out; if Æneas was lost for ever like his father,
who could face the lasting blame of Janet?

The thin moon, slicing through the mirk of clouds, lit wanly things
about him but to make their shapes uncanny. An acre to the westward of
the house was laid out trimly, level as a pond, with here and there some
knots of evergreen, the myrtle and the holly, under them black shades
that had a look of ambush. More solemn shadows, wider spread, more
likely to be harbouring the men who sought him, lay below the thick
groins of the trees, and spilled at intervals an inky pool half-way
across the broad path of the avenue that stretched before him like a
nightmare passage. Not life nor living dangers in these glooms compelled
him to stand still a moment, half-inclined to turn, but something very
old and rediscovered in himself; forgotten dreads of boyhood in wild
winter wastes of midnight, and his people breaking from some thicket
under moon to see before them spread unfriendly straths and hear the
wind in perished heather. The mist it was they cherished—not the moon
who made their progress visible; too often had she brought calamity to
old Clan Alpine trailing through the snow, a broken and a hunted band,
with children whimpering.

The silliest of these old alarms, the ripple of the skin upon his back,
this unco evening now restored to him; he felt like one awakened from a
desperate dream, aware that nothing is about him but what man can
combat, yet bringing from his dream unreasonable terrors all intractable
to sense.

He had the worst ill of his race, the oldest—dubhachas: he was
forlorn, and feared his own forlornness as an omen.

“Tach!" said he to himself at last, and struck out boldly down the
avenue, like a man not apprehending anything, yet all the way were his
shoulders shrugged, and his eyes on either side of him expectant of a
sally from the dark.

Nothing happened. He reached the gate that was of iron; opened it,
passed through and made it swing. It had a balance, shutting of itself
upon a latch that loudly clanged at every swing before it settled. A
bell could not more noisily attract attention.

A while he hung about it, peering round and listening. He now had
cleared the wood; before him lay the fields, their boundaries vaguely
visible, and farther south the rising ground with rocks encumbered,
murmuring with the passage of the burn. No other house was near than
Bunchrew, not even shed nor sheep-fold. Outside the trees a bitter wind
was blowing; ice glittered in the ditches. His eyes searched every airt
for movement; nothing moved. Nor was there any sound to show the wood
was tenanted by other than its birds; he gave out once the howlet call,
so natural an owl cried back, but then its grove relapsed to silence
deeper than before. Only the breeze in beeches, high in the branches,
harsh and dry, continuous, neither hum nor hiss, but a babbling about
old things forgotten of the world, remembered by the great community of
woods; the creak of boles, the tinkle of dead leaves.

He was surprised, uneasy. When he had entered on this project, driven to
it by the blank despondency of Janet, each nerve of him was strung for
something instant and decisive. But this unlooked-for absence of the men
confounded him: they might be gone for good, so spoiling every chance of
his manœuvre leading him to Æneas, and the moon was sinking.

A clamour of birds out on the ebb gave him a notion that men walked
there—they were on the sands and watching Bunchrew from the back; he
turned down to the shore.

The tide should now be flooding, but the sea was still far out, and in
the bay of Bunchrew every waukrife bird that haunts the shore at night
was screaming. He heard the grey goose call; peewits, too late of
leaving, ducks and whaups were in a multitude that dinned astoundingly;
somewhere an otter whistled.

A more melancholy place for ruffian engagements Ninian, who liked a wood
or rock, had never seen, and the moon made worse its dreariness. The
bay, for all its birds, was like a desert, and the breeze swept through
it like a knife. Far off, disconsolate, the frith was moaning.

On a horn of the bay the burn came down, well-filled, and bordered with
rough scrub of thorn and willow on the knolls of sand. Its channel
thrust through the sands a bit, then branched in rivulets that rambled
awkwardly in Ninian's way, too deep to wade with comfort and too wide
for jumping, and he found himself entangled. It vexed him most that
nothing had been gained so far by his adventure; wherever the men were
gone they were not visible; the wide stretch of the bay was empty save
of birds. He peered, he listened uselessly, and then he sniffed, and, on
the sniffing, started.

Green sticks were burning! The wind had brought on it the smell of fire.

Without a pause he waded through a pool and sought the channel of the
burn, and followed it through stones. He stole across salt grass with
caution, parted sauch-tree branches, and looked down into a linn, the
last stand of the Bunchrew ere submitting to the sea.

And there he saw what instantly commanded flight.

He had never thought about a boat!

He knew that they were seamen who pursued him, who had followed him for
hours the day before and found his covert in the eas that morning, but
always he had thought of them as severed from their vessel, instruments
of Lovat and his vaults. One glance at the linn corrected him—a boat
was there in waiting for the tide, and four men round a fire were
supping.

They heard him in the bushes, saw his face a moment in the firelight,
and jumped. He turned to fly, his plan immediately abandoned in the face
of dangers unforeseen, but slipped on the frosted grass, and, falling,
rolled to their very feet.

They were on him in a swarm; he struggled only for a moment, then gave
in.

“Thoir thairis!" said he. “Give over! Ninian's done for." He had not
even tune to draw the dirk that now was always down his back; he was got
without a blow.

When they had done with him, “Well, lads," said he, “this is a warm end
to a cold day, whatever," and started whistling a tune with unconcern.

It was a singular company in which he found himself so suddenly—three
little men as black in the face as peat with weather, one of them a
hunchback; the fourth a man gigantic, shouldered like an ox, with sleepy
eyes and an open mouth that gave him a look of helpless laziness. The
big one plainly had stood by the boat all day; the others were the
hounds. This nook of the burn they occupied was chosen well for hiding.
The rocks and scrub about it screened it from the land, and even from
the frith it was invisible; a fire might burn in it in blackest night
and not betray a glimmer. But for the scent of Ninian he had never found
out where they lay.

What struck him as most curious was that they should fall on him and
master him without one spoken word. The small men hung on him like
leeches, and the big one brought his wrists together like a child's, for
all his struggling, and held them with one hand while he lashed a cord
about them with the other, but all without a voice. Not even when he was
settled with and helpless in their midst was speech from them; they sat
them down on boulders and resumed their meat.

The giant had been cook as well as butcher; he it was who stirred and
fed the fire and turned the flesh on it; the carcass of a lamb,
half-skinned, was lying near; its in-meat, dragged out on the stones,
was reeking still, and the knife, yet red, was at the giant's waist.

He was gnawing a mutton-bone; a tooth more brisk about a bone had Ninian
never witnessed, and it made him hungry just to see: the last food he
had tasted was the fish he shared with Forbes. A lamb at roasting never
smelled more savoury.

“If I was in the company of gentlemen," said he, with impudence, “and
they at meat, the first salute for me were 'stretch thy hand!'"

The black lads never said a word, nor even looked at him, but lifted
cinders from the fire and lighted pipes; the big one never answered,
either, for a while, but finished with his bone, and then picked up a
rib and held it out to Ninian, and for the first time showed himself not
dumb.

“Oh, men and love!" said he in island Gaelic, “but
Peter-the-son-of-James is sick of this pursuing! A silly, small man like
this to keep us from our sleep two nights, and spoil our sailing!"

At this the other three looked at their friend surprised and
disapproving; to Ninian they were like creatures of the tales wherein
queer figures not of earth come to a house at night and sit about the
gathering-peat, with mould upon their faces and their hair bedewed, so
that the children cry. Sailors they were for certain, for their clothes
smelled of the pitch, and the hunchback's hair was pleated, but an odder
crew, thought Ninian, was never shipped in Scotland.

“How can I eat," said he, “and my hands in bonds? It's not a hen I am."

At that the big one laughed, and loosed the prisoner's wrists, but first
he tied his feet.

Ninian drew closer to the fire, for he was shivering, took out the
sgian-achlais, the armpit knife, and started eating, with a look about
him. The boat, a broad-beamed craft of shallow draught, was floating in
the pool, with canvas boomed out on an oar for shelter aft. Reeds
fringed the water's edge below them; through them went the night breeze,
swishing mournful. The burn itself had many voices where it broke on
stones, and the sauch-tree switches sometimes gave a little shivering
pipe. The pallor of the moon came through them sifting.

Peter-son-of-James, when he had given him the meat and tied him freshly,
sat again and propped against a root, and shut his eyes for sleep, with
no attention to the questions Ninian poured on him. The brothers sucked
their pipes and fidged themselves, or they had seemed like granite. He
coaxed them and he twitted; tried them with a joke or two, and even
crooned a song; he might have been a merman they had found, without a
knowledge of his language; nothing would they say to him, and by-and-by
the hunchback took a stocking from his breast, half-made, and started
knitting.

At last the moon was gone; the wind went round a point to east; it grew
more chilly, and one of the men put driftwood on the fire. He was the
oldest of the three, if rime upon his beard was proof, and having sat
again, he said, offhand, “It's cold."

He spoke to no one in particular, and no one answered.

An hour went past. Except that every move of Ninian roused attention, he
might not have been there for them, so he picked a bit of wood half
charred, and started whittling with the small black knife. He made it
like a boat, with clever fingers, stuck two skelfs of mast in it, and
had it finished when the hunchback broke the silence.

“Were ye speaking?" said he.

He was turning the heel of his stocking, and it looked as if the first
man's speech had only reached his understanding.

There was no answer, though; the first man smoked his pipe, and the big
man snored, and Ninian industriously whittled, whistling to himself. He
knew they waited for the tide.

Another hour was gone when the third man tapped his pipe on his
boot-toe, got to his feet, and looked at the other two with some
impatience.

“Far too much of chattering!" said he, and started down the burn.

Ninian burst out laughing. “Oh, Peter!" said he to the big man, who had
started up, “it's often I've heard of the men of Boreray in the Isles
that keep their speech for courting, but I never heard them gossiping
before. Mo chreach! aren't they the merry ones! No wonder that you're
fat, man, sailing with such lads to give you laughter."

The big man gave a grin of comprehension, but said nothing in reply, and
looked at the other's feet. The cord, though still about the ankles, had
been cut an hour ago!

“I thought better of it," said Ninian, no way aback to be discovered.
“I'll go like the lamb with you if you will tell me where's my friend."

“He's on the ship," said the sailor; whereupon the whole night's
dubhachas, a load of apprehension, fell from Ninian's mind; he could
have danced for pleasure.

They did not trouble to tie him up again, but put him in the boat. The
tide was now well up; they drowned the fire and pushed down-water,
shipped four oars and started pulling. A heavy sea was running into
Bunchrew Bay; the night was dark as ink, with only one light visible in
all the world, and Ninian knew it for a ship's at anchor in the deep off
Kessock.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE WAYWARD LASS.


From the gut of the frith a wind was belching. They came through jabbled
water to the ship that strained upon her cable, heading to the narrows,
heaving so that she was all a-rattle. The big man gave a bellowing hail
as they went round her stern; a rope was thrown to them, and in the
feeble light of a lantern brought to the bulwarks Ninian saw that she
was neither a sloop, as the big-jowled man had called her at Lord
Lovat's party, nor a brig, as Forbes had said, but a sturdy schooner.
Plainly she was in ballast; her sides stood very high above the water.

“My goodness! but the tide's far out on her!" he said with great
simplicity, and the sailors laughed.

“It's not much that you know of boats," said Peter in broken English.

“Nothing at all," said Ninian readily, “except that they lie but poorly
on my stomach. Where's the door?"

They got him clumsily on board; he stood for a while with some
perplexity in the vessel's waist while the boat that had brought him off
was being led astern; then groped about the deck, gear-hampered, lit in
spots by the lantern that had been left upon the hatch, and by a glow
that came from somewhere at the poop. Now that he was shipped his
captors seemed prepared to leave him to his own devices, and the two men
who had come on deck on their arrival gave but a squint at him and
followed the others aft. Had the wind not hummed in cordage, and the
blocks been jerking, and a creak gone through her timbers every time she
rolled, the greatest peace would have prevailed; she might have been a
ship asleep.

He picked the lantern up and stumbled round with a shrewd eye cast on
everything about him—battened hatches lumbered up with ropes, a boat on
chocks, a coop with hens in it, and a harness cask without a lid, in
which salt beef was steeping. The wan glow at the poop, he found, came
from the companion of the cabin; looking down he saw a table and a lamp
above it swinging, but the place would seem to have no tenant. It reeked
with the smell of balsam. He was bending down to look into the cabin
when he heard a step behind him; straightened up at once with some
confusion to be found so curious, and walked in its direction, to find
himself faced by Æneas.

“Oh ille!" he said, with a grab at his coat, “is't you that's in it?
And I was thinking of you all this hour back clapped in shackles!"

Æneas for a moment could not speak. He looked at the other, stunned and
unbelieving. “In all the earth how came you here?" he said at last. “Is
it Grant that's got you?"

“Has Grant been on the prowling too?" said Ninian.

“Since morning. He went off with half his hands. 'Ye'll need them all,'
I said to him, 'and sharper wits than I suspect ye of.' I could have
staked my life he would not get you, and here you are. Oh, Ninian!
Ninian!"

He spoke with great distress.

“It wasna him at all," said Ninian, and cocked an ear for the men abaft.
“I came with a burly lad called Peter and three dreary men of the
poorest conversation; there they're aft at tying."

“I thought it was Grant who hailed," said Æneas, more surprised than
ever. “It mortifies the worse to think you should be caught by fools."

“In a way I wasna caught at all," said Ninian; “I let them take me. It
was the only way if I'm to get my boots off or to sleep in bed; I
couldna find ye otherwise."

He was standing by a mast, with the lantern held up so that he could see
the young man's face. He saw it very pale and weary, first, and then of
a sudden flushed with feeling. It was as if the morn came to the young
man's brow; he seemed transported.

“Tell me this, Mr Campbell," he said, with a shaken voice, “did you of
your own purpose submit yourself to these men only that you might join
me?"

“What else?" said Ninian. “You may be sure it wasna for a crack wi'
Captain Grant."

Æneas caught his arms. “Oh man!" said he, “you make me happy! I could
sing! I may be lost to Scotland, but I've found myself again. You canna
guess what joy is in my breast to find life better than I thought. I was
in a black mood all this day, reflecting on the wickedness of
human-kind, and sure the world was evil——"

“So it is!" said Ninian cheerfully, “but, man, there's blinks!"

“Blinks!" said Æneas; “you find me like a devil, and you make me like a
god! Never again can I think ill of human-kind. You came to me—you came
to me——"

He could not finish, broken down with feeling.

“Tach!" said Ninian, “there's nothing in't! Ye surely didna think I was
going to leave ye with those blackguards. If ye had seen me no' an hour
ago on Bunchrew sands, it's there ye would see the sick and sorry
gentleman, as frightened as a child because I didna ken what happened to
ye. But now I'm here wi' ye I'm quite joco; what is the best of life but
strife and two companions?"

“And yet," said Æneas, rueful now, “I'm wrong to feel like this; you
should not have come here. You have—you have a daughter. You'll never
get off this ship. She's sailing for America."

“Fair wind to her, then," said Ninian; “but one thing's certain—you and
me's no sailing wi' her. There's far too much for us to do in Scotland.
Two good heads on us to a lot of tarry sailors—it were shame to us if
we couldna quirk them! Ye're better off than I expected; the hold was
where I thought to find ye, snapped in links."

“In that particular," said Æneas, “I have no complaint. But for an hour
that I was yesterday shut up in the beak of the boat with rats and
cables, I've only been a prisoner to the ship and free to take the air
on her. And not all the time a prisoner to the ship either; to-day I was
ashore for hours with a crew on some pretence of getting water, which I
cannot fathom, since our casks are full and we took none back with us."

“Just that!" said Ninian. “I see! They knew there would be search, and
cleared ye out till it was over. Oh yes! I'm thinking Pat's a clever,
clever fellow! Where were ye yesterday when Duncan's lads were searching
for the guns?"

“That's when I was in the bows a prisoner. Grant ordered me below when
he saw a boat approaching; I had not seen the boat myself, and did not
know the searchers were on board till they were gone."

“Whisht!" said Ninian, “here they're coming."

*        *        *        *        *

The men at the stern came forward, looked into the cabin through the
skylight grating, then made for the fo'c'sle. The big man took the
lantern from Ninian's hand and blew its light out through a hole that
was in its horn. “It's warmer down below," said he, and gave them a
little push, but quite good-naturedly. They all went down together,
Ninian stumbling in the dark and knocking his head resoundingly against
the scuttle coamings.

Two men were in the fo'c'sle, one of them patching trousers and the
other fast asleep with his back to a deal partition that cut the place
in two, a doorway showing the narrower part beyond. A cruse that stank
of coalfish oil was smoking on a nail and gave a pauper light, but did
not altogether drown the smell of bilge. Ninian looked about him for a
place to sit.

“In here," said Æneas, and ducking his head passed through to the inner
den, with Ninian following. The only light it had came through the
doorway from the cruse, but enough to show a man well up in years, in
breeches, with a coat all tattered, stretched upon a chest.

“My fellow-prisoner," said Æneas. “There's no doubt left with him as to
where he's meant for. Can you guess?"

“Fine!" said Ninian, and sat upon a keg. “For the plantations." He
started speaking to the man, in English first, but found he had no word
of it but a phrase of “mich obliged," which he used for everything, most
laughably. Of his own tongue he was just as sparing, with a voice like
buttered brose; he had been drinking.

“I think he's safe," said Ninian. “I never can trust a Fraser, but he
hasna got the English and he'll no' can understand us. . . . Oh, Æneas!
Alan-Iain-Alain Og, your uncle, little thinks his man-o'-business is in
a place like this! Stop you, though! we'll get out o't. What happened ye
at the inn?"

On either hand of them, quite close, were bunks, and one of them, it
seemed, was Æneas's; he lay on his side in it and set forth all that
happened.

When he had leaped from the window of the inn, he had, like Ninian,
plunged for the close and landed in the net, but had escaped the
cudgelling. He fell with a jar that shook his senses; before he could
grip what happened, he was picked out from the trammel, whipped into the
inn, and thrust down in a cellar. He lay there quarter of an hour,
locked up in darkness; then was taken out to find that Ninian was in the
net, lashed up, with his head split open.

“I thought that you were dead," said Æneas with earnestness. “I'll never
see a man more like it."

“No, nor dead!" said Ninian; “Macgregors are as ill to kill as Tulla
trout. Go you on with your story, loachain!"

They had all gone to the water-side, Ninian carried in the net, and
Æneas walking, stupefied at this disastrous end to a night of terrors.
The wounded man walked too; he was the vessel's mate, a relative of
Grant's, and on the water-side he swooned. There was a boat; when Æneas
saw it, he came to his senses, shouted an alarm and roused some people
in a land of houses close at hand which looked out on the water. Windows
opened, whereupon, in consternation, he and the mate were bundled in the
boat, but Ninian proved too much for her, and he was left behind.

“That's just what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian. “Dead or
living I would be a handful!"

The boat was hurried off down-stream, her men in a frenzy for escape.
They reached the ship and found a furious skipper, who ordered them back
at once for Ninian: in leaving him he swore they had bungled all; he was
sure to follow.

“I knew he was a clever fellow, Pat!" said Ninian. “And they nearly had
me too, but for a brisk wee laddie and a lantern."

Four men went back; the ship made ready for immediate sailing. She had
ballast only, and was meant to lift a cargo further up the coast. Grant
whipped his crew about their duties like a thong—a fiery swearing man
with a scorching tongue, but luckily his rage with Ninian who had
stabbed his mate was not directed upon Æneas, whom he treated rather
with disdain than rudeness. On his ship he was feared by his crew, but
not detested like his mate, in whose misfortune all the crew rejoiced,
so much that they felt friendly to their prisoner.

“I thought he was a dog!" said Ninian. “Where is he?"

“Aft in the cabin there," said Æneas. “It's nothing very serious by the
way he blows his whistle. A hundred times a day he pipes for
something. . . . Hearken to him, there he goes!"

A whistle shrilly sounded through the ship.

The sailors, chattering forward, stopped to curse with fervour, and one
of them went up on deck. A minute later he cried down the scuttle for
four others.

“How many men's wi' Grant?" asked Ninian, whispering.

“Seven or eight," said Æneas, and the other's jaw went down.

“Good lord!" said he. “No wonder that ye're downed! This boat's a
barracks. And when is he coming back?"

“I thought you had been he," said Æneas, “when I heard you hailing. He
may come at any moment now."

Ninian was more concerned than ever: he drummed on his keg with nervous
fingers.

“I wish we were out of this," said he.

“You should never have come," said Æneas. “The more I think of that the
more I'm vexed. At least you should not have come alone. Did any one
know your purpose?"

“That's the bit!" said Ninian. “We're on a boat that has been jerqued
and nothing found on her. When I made up my mind that seeing I couldna
find ye I must let them take me where ye were, I thought ye were on
land, and on the land I aye can work a passage. When I saw the boat in
Bunchrew burn I got a fright, I'm telling ye! That didna suit my plan at
all. It's this way, Æneas—I was with his lordship, and I knew that I
was chased. We were at Bunchrew House. I thought to take a walk out in
the grounds and let myself be seized that they might take me where ye
were. Forbes knew what I was meaning. A man he had—the officer who
searched this ship—was going to follow me and watch. Whatever happened,
that man made a bungle of the business! Wherever I went I saw no signs
of him, and that of itself looked curious. I was sitting there with
Peter and the rest for hours and waiting for the tide, and he made no
appearance. I doubt—I doubt he lost me! I did the best I could and cut
a wee bit boat for a diversion, fitting her with masts, and stuck a rag
of my kilt through one of them, and left it by the fire. Unless they're
natural idiots they'll know what that means when they come on't in the
morning, for they'll look for me, I ken."

“But the thing is this," said Æneas, “we may be off by morning. Grant
will sail whenever he comes back and finds that you're on board."

“That's just what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian, and bit his
nails. And then of a sudden he got up.

He went forward where the sailor patched his clothes, and
Peter-son-of-James with great minuteness span a tale of his exploits
ashore. A third man in a scarlet shirt, and with a high bald cliff of
forehead, hunched below the light and read a Bible like a man apart in
body as in spirit. The rest were still on deck. Peter, noway checked by
Ninian's entrance, kept his story going for the tailor, and Ninian
himself must laugh to hear his seizure at the last put on a droll
complexion. He had dropped of his own accord into their hands when they
had given up all hope of getting him, and did not greatly care.

“What kind of warlock bodies had ye yonder, Peter?" Ninian asked; “I
thought that they were dumb."

The big man roared and slapped himself, his white teeth glistening.

“I thought that that would bother ye!" said he. “Three of the silliest
creatures ever shipped. They're brothers with a quarrel, and for years
they have not split one word between them. But, man, they're ready with
the stick; if you have a head at all you'll mind the humped one."

Ninian screwed his face. “My grief!" said he, “was't he that loundered
me? The little deil! Man of my heart! but he put dirling in the thickest
head in Albyn! and all for a ploy of old MacShimi's!"

“Better for us," said Peter, “if MacShimi's ploys were all on shore;
this one of his has spoiled a mate on us, and, what is worse, has lost
us two days' friendly wind."

Æneas joined them; all in the cheeriest key, but for the salt who pored
upon his Book, they might be a company of friends, and the seamen proved
not ill-conditioned, dull, nor ruffianly,—just vagrom men prepared to
pull on any rope the skipper bade them.

“Where will I get a drink?" said Ninian of a sudden, stopping short in a
banter of the tailor.

“At the scuttle-butt on deck," the tailor said, and Ninian, with a look
aft Æneas, made for the ladder.

The night was dark as pitch when he got on deck, and the wind had risen
freshly from the north, so that the schooner, swung thwart-tide, rolled
wildly. Aloft the tackle sang, and the ship was full of noises, not all
of her own complaining, for aft the men were speaking loudly in the
cabin; he could hear them plainly though the door was slid. No watch was
on the deck; he hung for a moment to a shroud and swung to the vessel's
heaving, looking ardently at lights along the shore at less than a
half-mile's distance—Clachnaharry.

In another moment he had whipped his shoes off; found the scuttle-butt
with ease, though a man unused to ships might search for it an hour,
dipped in the pannikin quietly and took a drink, and sought again the
hatch.

“What was it ye called the thing?" he shouted down.

“The scuttle-butt," bawled back the tailor.

“I'm none the wiser," Ninian cried; “come you up, Æneas, and show me
where it is. It's dark's a dungeon."

Æneas came up the ladder. As soon as he stood on deck the other caught
him, led him to the side, and whispered, “Kick your shoes off,
loachain; now is the hour for us if we are the men. There's not a soul
on deck of all these swabs that surely have come in by hawse-holes; the
boat we came with's lying at our stern. Hie aft!"

Through the truck of the deck he picked his way to the poop as if his
eyes were cat's, and Æneas after him in stocking-soles, with not a scrap
of faith in a scheme so suddenly contrived.

The wind was lulled a bit, and the sound of speech came plainly from the
cabin. On land was some one playing on a fiddle. In the utter dark of
the stern, where the tiller strained its lashings, they went stumbling
over coils, and felt about the rail for fastenings.

They came on nothing but empty cleats—the boat was gone!

“My grief, we're done!" said Ninian.

He crept to the cabin skylight and looked through the grating, then came
back with a great chagrin. “No wonder," said he, “they're at their ease
about us! There's only two down there with the mate; the other three are
off for Grant, and I was a fool that did not think of that!"

“Indeed, it seemed too simple altogether," Æneas said, and his heart
went like a drum. “They know we're here as safe as in a Tolbooth."

“There's no' another boat?" said Ninian.

“There's two on shore with Grant, and the only one is that one on the
deck," said Æneas.

“On chocks! She might as well be on Ben Lomond. And just you look at
Clachnaharry! You could throw a stone! But I'm no' done: I'll have my
soles on it before Pat Grant comes back. Come here!"

He caught him by the sleeve and hurried him along the ship to the very
bows beside the windlass, with a loud clash of the pannikin as they
passed the butt. The cable, like a bar, stretched to the hawse-hole,
where it was served with rags to check its galling: some bights of it on
the bitts and some fathoms ranged behind.

“Stand back!" said he, with a fumbling at his armpit—“stand back, or it
may brain ye!"

With the knife he cut the cable at the serving, strand by strand, all
but the very last.

“Now on wi' our boots," said he, “and back to that ill-smelled hole;
she'll do the rest hersel'."




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE ESCAPE.


They could hear from the Black Isle shore the fiddle playing “Moidart
Lasses" with a screech in the higher parts. “That man has a hack on his
wee finger," Ninian said as he went down the ladder, drying his mouth
like one who had been drinking.

“A bleak night, and a cold!" he said to the sailors. “There's something
brewing, and it's well for us we have a shelter."

They scarce were down a minute when the two men from the cabin joined
them, with a third they had not seen before, a lowlander who had been
tending to the mate.

“If we had just the peats," said Ninian, “we were a ceilidh. My notion
of a ship and she at anchor would be wind above that had no meaning man
could guess, and below, good stories going, full of pith. Didst ever
hear the tale of Conal Crovi?"

“Faoinsgeulachd!—But emptiness and folly!" said the man who had the
Book, and sighed.

Ninian never heeded him, but plunged into a story of a king of England's
sons and a tenant, Conal Crovi; marvellous things that happened them in
Erin; a wedding lasting twenty days and twenty nights, and hearty work
with swords. Never was a man more talented at telling; though in parts
the tale was old to them—a story of the peat-fire and the winter, they
sat round him, squatting, like so many bairns, and gave themselves to
every fancy. “Sliochd! slachd!" would he say when swords were
slashing; little hurried bits he put in rhyme, and lilted; from isle to
isle with him was but a spang, and even Æneas, every nerve of him on
edge with expectation, lost at times his interest in the vessel's
movements, not for any heed of what was told, but for surprise at
Ninian's mastery of himself and of his hearers. It might have been a
summer sheiling of the hills; the story-teller played on them as one
would play on reeds; he seemed himself transported, clenching with his
fists and scowling, whinnying like a horse when it came to Conal's
stallions, high head and lofty speech for challenge and the talk of
kings, and a mighty laugh for the binding of Conal Crovi. Had the width
of the world been 'twixt him and things threatening, he could not have
seemed more at ease; but the sweat, as Æneas saw, was standing on his
brow, and every heave the vessel gave more violent than usual lit his
eyes.

It seemed a tale without an end. The Fraser, who came ben to listen,
fell asleep; the lowlander ate bread and onions, but all the rest,
enchanted, hung on Ninian's lips, and Peter-son-of-James, his mouth wide
open and his eyeballs staring, panted.

What Æneas expected from the cutting of the cable he had no clear
notion, only that the strain should snap her tether and the wind, behind
her, drift her into shore. As time went on, and still the story ran,
with nothing happening to change the nature of her swing, or of the
sounds the water made against her hull, he grew despondent, thinking
Ninian's plan had failed.

And then there came a lurch that stopped his breath—not great, but
still enough to show the ship had sheered. She lay a little over, and
the plowt of water altered.

The tailor raised his head. “Slack tide," said he, on thinking; back to
his breeks again, and the tale went on more warm than ever.

Æneas sank again; in Ninian's manner nothing fed his hopes till of a
sudden something scraped; the schooner shivered, and the cruse swung
over.

'Twas not as if she had been stranded, but as though some wizard hand
had caught her by the keel. Uprose the floor; below, the ballast rolled;
the Wayward Lass careened.

“A chiall! she's grounded!" someone cried, and they scrambled for the
deck. Peter-son-of-James picked up the lantern, lit it at the cruse, and
was the last of those awake to follow. They all poured out on planks
steep-tilted; Æneas, but for Ninian's hand, would have lost his footing.

“I never was more put to it to keep story brisk," said Ninian,
whispering. “I waited for that hemp to jerk the way a man would wait for
hanging. But here she is ashore at last and neither her nor us the worse
for it."

The ship was grounded eastward of the clachan, on a sandy bottom, where,
at ebb, the spout-fish and the cockle might be gathered by the bairns.
Between her and the shore the lantern lit a sea that frothed and broke
with sounds that, with the piping of the rigging and the crew's
commotion, gave to her situation a look of jeopardy more grave than
Ninian suspected. She listed to her starboard, broadside to the land
that was invisible; a sleet began to fall; upon her lifted parts the
waves were thudding; at every thud she shook as if she had been kicked
upon the buttocks, and below, loose dunnage made a noise.

At first her men seemed stunned and helpless. The giant Peter, in whose
breast appeared some curious fondness for her, blubbered like a child,
and cried continually, “The bonny Lass! the bonny Lass!—she's
gone!" as though she were a sweetheart, or the home of his heredity. The
rest in stupefaction clung to shrouds and gabbled Gaelic, till the mate,
a spectre figure in a shirt, came staggering from the cabin and assumed
command.

They searched out somewhere in the hold a rusty chaffer that they filled
with wood and fired. It stood upon the bows and lit the whole ship up,
and sometimes even gave a glimmer to the shore that looked forlorn and
low. They stood together for a little in its smoke and cried out loudly
to the land.

The great moods come to us in curious places, in the most unlikely
hours, and sometimes we will feel a grandeur that we share, in common
things—to see a man plough on the hill against the cloud, or hold his
face up to the buffet of the storm. A mood like that came now to Æneas,
to hear the sailors cry out altogether for their fellow-men as from a
pit, their faith in human aid enduring. To him the sea was strange; he
had no share in Ninian's assurance that they might escape; the men's
anxiety seemed very ominous, and yet he had no fears. He looked up at
the tall spars of the vessel, slanted; at the sloping deck; the chaffer
flaming, and the men, a knot together, roaring to the shore; he saw the
frith boil round them, hissing, Ninian hanging to a pin, possessor of
himself, and waiting, and his heart, that should be low, was high as if
with drink. It seemed to him the one keen starry hour that he was born
for. Something in him sang.

And then, in a moment, was the mood departed; he was vexed to think a
boat was killed.

He crept along the slanted deck to Ninian, and spoke to him. “I feel,"
said he, “as if we had done murder."

“As God's in heaven," said Ninian, “that is just what I was thinking to
myself! It's not as if a boat could hit ye back. And a brave boat would
she be, I'll warrant—just like a human body; many a storm! many a
storm! . . . I wish I had thought of something else." And then he shook
himself. “Tach!" said he, “the boat's no' ours nor of our clan. There's
many another boat in Scotland. And she'll no' sink in the sand; she's
no' a brallach. With any sense at all they'll get her off at
spring-tide. If I could swim like you I wouldna bother. There's the
shore."

The shore was there indeed, but growled inhospitable; only one light
glimmered now in Clachnaharry, and the sailors bawled in vain.

“What better are we off?" asked Æneas, holding to his bonnet.

“Stop you a wee," said Ninian, “and I'll tell ye that!" The men were
still a cluster at the bows, but now beyond the chaffer, where the
windlass lay. He crept along the deck and down into the cabin where a
light was burning; cast his eyes about; tossed up some bedding; searched
a chest, and pounced at last upon Grey Colin thrust head-first into a
barrel. “Ah! son of love!" said he with great delight, and stuck it in
the belt that held his dagger.

He was not gone a minute, but that minute changed the whole complexion
of affairs on deck. When he got back the bellowing of the men had now a
menace: they had seen the cable. Though he had cut it underneath the
serving, so that any scrutiny might fail to show it had been sundered
otherwise than by the hawse-hole's chafing, something in the nature of
the rupture hinted at the knife.

With savage cries they scrambled aft, the bellowing of
Peter-son-of-James, who led them, loudest. The mate was in their midst
with the lantern in his hand, a gruesome figure, with his white limbs
showing; most of them had handspikes, picked up at the windlass. Their
whole concern about the ship now seemed forgotten in their rage at their
discovery. With the chaffer flaming up behind them they appeared like
creatures born of fire. The ship careened so much they could not run,
but crawled with awkwardness along the coamings of the hatch, or with
one foot on deck the other on the bulwark.

Ninian stood at the cabin door with Æneas and the Fraser, who had just
awakened, sober, from his sleep, and come on deck bewildered. They
propped, to keep from slipping to the scuppers, with their feet against
some ring-bolts, dubious at first what this advance intended, and the
hunchback, brandishing his spike, was close on them, when Ninian cried,
“Down!"

He pushed them to the opening; they fell down half a dozen steps, and
rolled on the cabin floor. In a moment he had entered too, and shut the
door and shot its bolts. Already was the hunchback pounding.

“They'll burst it into spales, quite easily!" said Æneas.

“Of course they will!" said Ninian, gasping. “There's my dirk for ye,
and you, man, Fraser, take this knife. Keep an eye on the skylight
window, and I'll see to the stair. I'm a great hand on a stair wi'
little Colin."

Again, for a flash, came the mood to Æneas that this rare tingle of the
flesh, this throbbing of the breast, was finer than the rapture come of
books. There was a pause among the seamen who were cursing loudly; “I'll
shell them like the peas!" cried Peter-son-of-James. He went to search
for something, and came back and thundered on the door as with a sledge.
It burst wide open, and he stood beyond it with an adze which he was
swinging like a halbert. His body filled the opening; behind him all the
rest were snarling.

“For the sake of all thou ever saw, set not one foot within that door or
I will broach ye like a cask!" cried Ninian, beating with his broadsword
on the ladder.

A handspike, flung like a javelin from behind the giant's back, came
flying down and grazed the Fraser's temple. It was the hunchback threw
it. The mate somewhere behind them all was hounding on.

Ninian looked such an asp, his sting so threatening, that the big one
swithered. He lowered the tool. “Bring here a gun!" he cried across his
shoulder.

“If it comes to guns," said Æneas, “we're done for!"

“No fear of that!" said Ninian. “There's no' a gun on board this boat;
they were poinded all by Duncan's gallants. And these ones think I divna
know."

He had turned his head a moment to say this: the big man put a foot in
the companion, where the sleet was falling, melting as it fell, and
slipped upon his back. The adze fell from his hands and rolled into the
cabin. He turned upon his fours and scrambled, awkward, on the ladder;
the others jammed within the opening ready to pour down.

“I have no war wi' ye! Go back!" cried Ninian, and prodded with his
weapon. “Go back! I wouldna soil my sword on creash!" He beat with the
weapon's flat on the big one's rump: he bore himself like one who herded
swine. “If the tail were on ye I would twist it!" he declared, and Peter
hauled himself on deck.

Ninian tucked the sword below his arm and blew upon his hands as though
they had been frosted. The stubble on his face by now had changed him
greatly; he was rough and ruddy as the deer; his eyebrows, someway,
seemed to jut extraordinarily, like easings of a house, above his glance
that sparkled deep with venom.

“Now," said he, “we'll have a scuffle. Well I ken the sort of Peter!
I've marked his breech, and when he finds his pride he'll come again,
and wild will be his coming; that's the Isles! Æneas, my lad, take you
the eitch and work it like a wright if feet come down that ladder. Give
Fraser here the dirk; he's more a deacon wi't than you. I doubt they're
going to burst in by the roof."

Æneas picked up the adze and gave the dirk to Fraser, who rubbed the
little knife along its edge as if he were a flesher whetting, felt the
point of it, and grinned with satisfaction. “Mich obliged!" he said, and
took his post on the canted floor, close by the ladder foot.

The sailors had drawn back a bit, and somewhere in the waist were
holding counsel. Their voices came on flaws of wind, disputing. Æneas
got on his knees, and, stealing up, looked out. The mate had now a
blanket on, and half the men were working at the skiff on chocks,
upheaving her with block and tackle. Big Peter by himself was loosening
the lashings of a spar, a spare one stowed on deck: he plucked its
fastenings hurriedly and swore.

“They're going to launch the skiff," said Æneas, coming down.

Ninian shook his head. “That's bad!" said he. “The skiff's our only
chance of landing. If they send her off for Grant we're worse than ever.
My whole concern is this, that Patrick and his tail may join them any
minute."

Æneas crept up again and down immediately.

“They're swinging her over the side," said he, “but here is Peter coming
with a plock."

He had no sooner said it than the spar, a great thick boom, was slid
across the sill of the companion, and its end thrust in their midst. It
reached clean through the cabin to the back.

“My grief!" said Ninian, “but that's the bonny spirtle!"

“What are they going to do with it?" asked Æneas, bewildered.

“What but to stir the porridge! Stand you back here in the corner; it's
a man that's cooking!"

He jumped himself, so saying, to the cabin's end below the ladder, where
he crouched with Æneas beside him. The spar began to sweep from side to
side, the greater part of it stuck far out on the deck, with Peter and
two others swinging. It crashed against the bunks and splintered them; a
table bolted to the floor was wrenched at one sweep from its fastenings
and at the next was shattered into bits. Above, the men “yo-hoed!" and
plied the lever; it was like a thing bewitched, infuriate; they dared
not stir an inch from where they crouched but at the risk of braining.

Fraser, who had slipped behind the chest and ducked at every sweep made
by the spar, was in the greatest danger; its ironed end seemed searching
for him, hovering at times above his head or thrashing at the chest.
Once he put his hand up, seizing at the butt; he might as well have
tried to check the heaving of the sea.

“Come here! Come here, or ye'll be killed!" cried Ninian, and he and
Æneas threw themselves upon the stick till Fraser with a rush got in
beside them.

“Do ye ken what I'm thinking to myself?" said Ninian to Æneas. “Of that
old devil Sandy sleeping in his bed and us like this! And every minute
that stick lashes there is lost to us; I'm just in terror Grant will
come."

“Can we not put a stop to it?" asked Æneas, as the spar tossed over them
and clashed against the cabin's sides.

“Can the whelk stop the pin?" said Ninian, and as he said so, seemed to
take a thought. He whipped with his sword at the cord that swung the
lamp; it fell, and they were left in darkness save for what of glow came
from the chaffer's burning.

On that the stirring of the spar was stopped; a great calm came on the
cabin; only the sea outside was thrashing on the quarter; the seamen
were withdrawn. Æneas crept up again to see what they were doing.

“The boat is launched," said he; “there's some one going ashore."

“If anybody goes ashore it's us!" said Ninian. “They're not on board
her, are they?"

“No, but the big one's putting off his coat," said Æneas.

Ninian crept up the stair and looked; the Fraser came behind them,
smelling of some balsam he had found and rubbed his head with where the
spike had struck him. More loud than ever sang the wind aloft; the sleet
was turned to hail that stung their ears; the boat was tossing, twenty
feet from them, close to the fallen bulwark, and the sea between them
and the shore was creaming white. Two men were at the fire; the mate lay
helpless on the hatch and coughed as if his chest were racking; the
others worked at ropes.

“Have ye got the eitch?" asked Ninian in a whisper, and Æneas held it
out.

“Then now's the time to travel! There's eight men there, but they havena
got one blade among them."

“Seven," said Æneas. He had been counting them, with the same thought in
his mind as Ninian.

“Na, na, but eight," said Ninian again. “And that's no' reckoning the
red one wi' the hoast; there's nothing left in him but water-brash. But
ye'll mind there's Peter; a man of the Isles whipped to his pride has
the rage of three. A mach! A mach!"

He burst from the companion, flourishing his sword and calling out
“Ardcoille!" the clan-cry of his folk, with Æneas and Fraser at his
heels, the Fraser screaming something foul. They stumbled down the deck
and swept upon the sailors, who went scattering before them, sliding
bent along the tilted hatch with nothing in their hands for their
defence. Æneas stumbled on the handspikes they had dropped together in a
heap, to launch the boat; he picked them up and threw them overboard.
The wits of him were never more his own; he saw the whole thing like a
picture in a glass, himself outside of it; his mind was working like a
clock; he felt endowed with life eternal nothing could destroy. Had he a
sword or dirk his stomach would have risen, but the adze, a tool of
peace, seemed like a pen to him; he felt that he could dip with justice
in the blood of men.

Two of the seamen plunged down through the scuttle to the fo'c'sle; the
rest crept towards the bows; the mate lay on his side and barked, with
guttering. Ninian stretched the sword.

“Cry on!" he shouted, herding them like sheep, and Fraser, like an old
grey cat, was spitting.

Of all that ran before them only Peter turned. He had his sleeves rolled
up, and in his hands a knife. His shirt was open at the throat and
showed a breast rough as a bull's-hide targe; he roared like one
demented. It was at Ninian he made, and had there been a hundred still
would he have come.

“I have no war wi' ye!" cried Ninian, slashing with his sword at air as
though he sheared at breckans. “But come ye nigh and I'll put death on
ye!"

The man was no way checked; he gave a jump and swept him from his feet;
they rolled together at the scuppers, with Ninian below. The knife was
back to strike him when the giant gave a grunt and settled like a log.

Æneas had struck him with the hammer of the adze between the shoulders.

“The skiff! The skiff!" gasped Ninian, getting to his feet, and in a
second they were overboard and into her. They fell all in a huddle on
her thwarts.

Æneas fumbled at the ropes, but Ninian had a quicker way; he took the
adze and cut them at a blow.

The whole affair on deck had taken less than half a minute; the crew had
not had time to find them weapons; they gathered now and screamed with
rage to see the skiff drift off, and some one threw a clasp-knife.

The three fell to the oars and slipped through broken water to the
shore.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE ADVOCATE COMMANDS.


They were no sooner landed through a sea that wrought like barm than
Fraser dropped the dirk, with “mich obliged!" and vanished, making for
the ferry. He bade them no farewell, but just took heels to it, and yet
no trouble threatened; neither man nor beast beyond themselves was
visible; it was a solitary place, grown thick with rushes, over which
the spray was borne like smoke. The fire upon the stranded ship was
burning clear and high, and now the rain was gone.

“My soul! but we are in the desperate country!" Ninian said. “A man
would need to have his wits about him here. I wouldna say but that one's
off to stir up mischief."

“Not he!" said Æneas. “Poor man! he's not quite sure of us, and he has
little cause to trust his fellow-men."

“What trouble was he in with Sim?" asked Ninian as they walked up from
the boat.

“He does not know himself. The sailors lifted him the night they lifted
us—a poor old cottar man who has a wife and family across the water and
they know not where he is."

Ninian stopped, stock-still, among the rushes.

“I wish ye had told me that before!" he said with great vexation. “If I
had kent the sailors took him he would not escape till I learned
something more."

He walked a step or two and stood again and beat his palms.

“Toots, man, Æneas!" he said, “ye should have told me! All this time was
I not thinking he was one condemned for reiving? What ye tell me puts
another colour on him altogether."

“What does it matter?" said Æneas.

“It might matter nothing, but on the other hand it might matter a great
deal. Ye make me curious about that man—what was he gathered in with us
for?"

“He doesn't know, I tell you."

“Perhaps; but if I had a chance I maybe could have helped him to find
out. And this is the way of it now, that I'll have to see that man again
before I leave this country. Do ye no' see, Æneas, boy, that if we knew
what he was seized for, it might throw a light on what they seized
ourselves for?"

“I fear I'm very stupid," Æneas said humbly. “I never thought of that."

Ninian caught him by the arm. “God forbid," said he, “that I should
think ye stupid, loachain! Ye're anything but that, although ye havena
Ninian's practice with the quirks of man. It was a clever man who picked
the handspikes up and threw them overboard; if you had not done that we
couldna risk the skiff, they would have brained us. And it was no stupid
man who struck big Peter with the eitch when I was struggling with him;
you and me have now a bond of manrent; after this I'm man of yours
although it was against the world. That's twice ye plucked me from the
brink of life; I'll no' forget!"

He said it with great depth of feeling, then, as if ashamed, broke off,
and with a heather step went through the rushes.

They were only two miles off, or less, from Bunchrew, and they kept
along the shore, with Ninian leading. The dark was like a mort-cloth at
the start, but by-and-by it seemed less thick, and long before they came
to Bunchrew House they saw its light between its trees. Already was the
morning old; in Clachnaharry all was dark; the schooner might have
burned to ash and not an eye ashore to see her.

Only twice they spoke in all their walking—Æneas asked where they were
going, and later on was asked by Ninian if he knew the springs of all
this tribulation.

“There's little doubt of that," said Æneas,—“Pat Grant was hired by
Lovat."

“Clever!" said Ninian, “but do ye ken the reason?"

“That beats me. I've turned the whole thing in my mind a thousand times
and get no light on it."

“Ye might well do that! It's a gey and kittle business. But never mind;
we'll fathom it before we're through."

The bar was on Bunchrew House when they got to it, though its lights
were burning; Ninian beat loudly on the door, and Forbes himself came to
it, with his sister in a wrapper.

“Come in! Come in!" he said with great relief. “I'm glad to see you, Mr
Campbell, and your friend, although you've spoiled a night on me."

“Dear me! and is this the wondrous lad?" said his sister, scanning Æneas
through her specs. “I thought ye would be something special to occasion
all this tirravee!"

Æneas smiled; this tart demeanour was his aunt's: he knew it masked the
sweetest nature.

Forbes still stood at the door. “Where's Boyd?" he asked,—he meant the
officer.

“Did he come after me?" asked Ninian.

“Of course! Yourself arranged it."

“And I could have sworn that he had yon! The silly man has botched it.
I never set eyes on him. The man, my lord, 's no' worth a docken! My
friend Macmaster was on board the ship, and no' far off, when Boyd was
searching her; if Boyd had any sense he would have tracked the boats."

“Hoots! never fash wi' Boyd; he'll turn up for his breakfast, I'll be
bound," said the lady with impatience. “Duncan, you take Mr Campbell in
where I have left his supper—and a bonny hour for supper, two o'clock!
This way, Mr Æneas, for you, a moment; here's an old acquaintance who'll
be glad to see ye."

Now all this time had Ninian never mentioned to his friend the name of
Janet. He thought to do so, once or twice, but someway baulked at it.
Miss Forbes's speech meant nothing, then, to Æneas, who followed, mildly
wondering, to her chamber.

Ninian and the Advocate went to the dining-room, and there the latter
learned the whole night's incidents, save one particular—how came the
ship to drift. On that it seemed to Ninian discreet to keep his counsel.

Forbes listened with the greatest eagerness. “Well done!" he said. “You
have been lucky, but you have been wise, too, Mr Campbell. I must
confess your plan for some hours back had seemed to me fantastic, and I
blamed myself for falling in with it so meekly. With rogues like these
heaven knows what might have happened. Now that the ship is on the hard,
we'll have a chance to go a little deeper in the business with Captain
Grant. Since you went off I've had some news about the fellow Fraser."

“What kind of news, my lord?" asked Ninian sharply.

“He's not from Strathglass at all, as Boyd made out, but from the Muir
of Ord. He came to Beauly on the Wednesday with a cow, and got inveigled
to a tavern that night by sailors—plainly some of your particular
friends. They took him, primed, into a boat, and now the hue and cry is
out among his people. There's far more stir about his missing than your
friend's, for he's a simple, harmless creature, not a bodle in his purse
to tempt such villainy. His sons were here some hours ago; they have not
left a yard of both sides of the water but they've searched. I'm glad to
know he's clear."

“Do ye ken anything about him, my lord?" asked Ninian.

“I never heard the name of him before this night, but I was struck by
the fact that he and you and young Macmaster should be all in trouble on
the self-same evening, and all with sailors, so I pried into his history
from his sons, but not with any great illumination. He's a cottar on the
Muir, and has been there a dozen years, an honest and industrious man,
who does not owe a penny in the country, and has not had, so far as I
could find, an enemy."

“There's something still behind," said Ninian, with confidence. “It
wasna for a prank, nor for his sale they lifted him; the poor old body
wouldna fetch a guinea in Virginia. I never saw the man before, nor yet,
of course, did Æneas, but it will stick in my mind he's mixed up some
way in whatever lies behind Lord Lovat's variance wi' us."

Forbes helped them both to a little spirits. “That was a point of course
I did not overlook," said he. “I questioned every particle of Fraser's
history, and learned a lot of useless genealogy, but came at last to
this important fact, that up till a dozen years ago he was in Lovat's
service. He was about the stables. He joined him in the year of Mar, and
was among the Frasers at Glenshiel."

“They didna have a quarrel?" Ninian asked.

“He quitted Castle Dounie on the best of terms with Lovat, and his
lordship seems to have been very good to him in some ways ever since. At
this time of the year he got an annual haunch of venison, and on the
Wednesday he went missing was at Lovat's thanking him for its receipt."

Ninian sat back in a chair, his chin upon his breast, and brooded.

“My lord," said he at last, “if I could just get half an hour wi'
Fraser, I would give the last placks in my sporran. It's galling just to
think that I was in his company for hours this night and never thought
to draw him! This means I canna leave the North to-morrow, and that
thought was all my joy when I was landed from the schooner."

Forbes firmed his jaw; he had a way of snapping up his teeth which left
his mouth a slit.

“My good man," said he, “you're going to-morrow! You're going with your
girl. My sister has made all arrangements. Unless you want that lass of
yours to wither in our hands she'll have to flit before another night
like these two last. Your friend can please himself, but if I had my
will he would go with you, and I fancy that he'll do it gladly. It's
this way of it, Mr Campbell—there are men who seem to bear about with
them the seeds of trouble, rather would I put it that they carry with
them elements of storm, and either you or young Macmaster are endowed
that way. Since ever you came over Corryarrick, I have lived in a
continual state of great anxiety. Smuggling of arms, and broken roads,
and stouthrief, and kidnapping! You have stirred up or unmasked more
mischief than I have experienced in the last three years. I look about
the country by day and see it peaceable and frank, my neighbours at
their honest business, and yet, since you came here, the nights are all
filled up for me with wild forebodings and with rude alarms. This has
happened before with you, my good man. It was the same way when you came
in search of Duncan Cameron—that devilish business that goes yet like a
wail through all Lochaber, though I give you credit for it; who but you
could find him in such marvellous circumstances? It was the same when
you got the Frenchmen; my heart was in my mouth that whole month that
you spent among us. The stormy-petrel may be in the scheme of
providence, but I'm not going to have it skirling up just now in
sheriffdom of mine; away you back and screech beside Loch Fyne!"

Ninian made circles with his glass upon the table. He had listened with
a face that showed no sign but of attention. But now he had a stubborn
demeanour and his brow was knotted.

“It's not me that's the storm-cock, sir," said he. “Ye have him here
continually, and he wears the pigeon's feathers. If it was for his race
I might respect him, but 'tis always for himself, and that was not the
way of it in ancient Gaeldom."

“But, my dear sir," said Forbes with some impatience, “you are finished
here. You have done all you were sent to do by Islay and his Grace.
We'll see, henceforth, ourselves, to Barisdale and this sly traffic with
done muskets, and you are satisfied, I think, that Lovat was no party to
Drimdorran's disappearance. I ask you—I command you, therefore, to
depart this shire immediately; whatever dirt you have to stir, you'll
find it where you came from. . . . No, no, Mr Campbell! Not one word of
mutiny! You'll go to-morrow. That's the way my sister took Macmaster in,
himself, to see the girl; she was fixed herself on an immediate
departure if you found him, and we thought it best that she should
influence him before you made objections. I'm telling you the thing is
settled! I've got a chariot—the first in Inverness; the first that ever
used the Road this side of Spey. It brought my brother to Culloden, and
it's going for a doctor for him, back to Edinburgh. Instead of stalking
moors and climbing corries in the way you came, you'll just go back a
gentleman, on wheels, and handsel my new coach and Wade's New
Road. . . . No, no! Not one word now, I command you!"

“Ye canna command me, my lord!" said the beachdair, and pushed aside
his glass from which he had not even sipped. “I have MacCailein at my
back; I have my warrant. But whether or no, the country's free to me; my
name is Campbell, not Macgregor of the mist, and it is not the nicest
manners between two gentlemen sitting in a room and at a glass, for one
to talk about commands. I may be coaxed, I may be flattered, but little
ye ken of me, my lord, to think ye can command me like a gillie."

“Hoots, man!" said Forbes, “don't let the Hielan' birse get up. That's
the worst of ye all; ye find an insult where there's none intended."

“I canna tell what ye intended, my lord, but I ken the Saxon language.
The Duke himself would not speak so to me, though I am under his
protection."

“Ah!" said Forbes, and shrugged his shoulders. “His grace is wise. He
understands a people who put all their silly pride in ritual and quarrel
at a word, but eat the humblest pie in other ways. . . . Well, well, I
do not command anything; I entreat you—what is it you say?—tha mi a'
guidhe ort!—to lose no time in clearing off. I am speaking for your
good, and for your daughter's. . . . How came the ship to drift?"

He asked the question with sly meaning in his manner; Ninian was
staggered.

“She broke her cable," he replied, but looked uneasy.

“She didn't by any chance, now, slip her shackling?"

“No," said Ninian, “she sundered at the hawse."

“You rascal!" Forbes exclaimed, and shook his fist at him. “You did the
deed! I'm sure of it as if I saw you do it."

“In faith that's just what they were thinking on the ship. 'Twas that
that roused them. I had to get ashore some way, my lord. . . . It's you
that should have been the beachdair."

“I knew it! Ninian, ye must be gone ere things become more jumbled.
These rogues whose ship ye've stranded will be hotter on your track than
ever, and worst of all I'm feared of him who is behind them. Tha mi a'
guidhe ort!" He gave again his Gaelic with an English blas, not quite
familiar with the language.

“I challenge him and all his tribe!" said Ninian, and thrust out his
chin. “It's not for fear of him and of his plots I'll go to-morrow as
your lordship craves, but for Macmaster's sake; I'm only at the start of
a tremendous story."

“Now that's a wise man!" said Forbes, relieved. “And seeing you have
fallen in with my proposal, I'll be frank with you and tell you this—I
have a personal wish to see you back as quick as possible to where you
came from. To-night I have gone over sundry things that puzzled me for
many years; the more I think of it the more am I convinced that
Duncanson needs redding up. There's no one else can do it but yourself;
it must be done in Inveraray, and I don't want you dirked in my diocese
before you leave, though dirking is your fate as sure as God's in heaven
if you bide longer here."

“Very well," said Ninian, and took off his glass. “But Æneas must come
wi' me, and we darena start by daylight. If you will have the coach a
bit from Inverness we'll join it there. I ken what Inverness is—every
bairn and burgess in't will run to see a chariot."

“That's true," said Forbes. “I had not thought of that. I'll send the
coach to Daviot at gloaming and you'll get it there. In any case you
must conceal your movements; not for worlds would I have that sweet lass
of yours disturbed, but——"

He stopped, and looked at the other's garments. “H'm!" said he, “ye're
not in the grandest trim for going wi' ladies, neither you nor young
Macmaster. I'll have to lend ye clothes more seemly to my braw new
coach."

“My grief!" said Ninian, with a start, “I clean forgot! The kilt is
second nature to me still, for all these years of breeks. These ruffians
have our clothes we paid good money for, and two of the bonniest hats
your lordship ever saw cocked on a Gaelic heid. I never thought to
search the ship for them."

“I'll search the ship and Fraser's inn for them to-morrow," Forbes
replied, and then he drew up short again, with a knowing look for
Ninian. “Ah!" he said, “I understand! I wondered! The Hielan' birse went
down a bit too quick there. I ought to have remembered your way of
conceding small things of no account with a generous air to cover up
your dourness about things material. What way do you mean to spend
to-morrow?—or to-day, as I should put it, for it's morning?"

“I'll go to the Muir of Ord——"

Forbes raised up his hands, despairing.

“There's no danger, my lord; give me a boat to Beauly mouth, and I'll be
back for dinner. I must see Fraser or his family; the thing's of prime
importance; he has my wee black knife."

“I'm not so dull as that!" said Forbes. “Well, go your ways; I wash my
hands of it; but oh! I wish I saw ye out of here!"

“Fraser ran for Kessock; he was making for the ferry; he'll be home,"
said Ninian, and then he started, lifting up his head. “There's somebody
moving outside," he whispered.

Forbes listened. “I hear nothing," said he. “It is the wind."

“The wind doesna wear boots, my lord. It's some one on the gravel."

There came a timid rapping back at the outer door. Ninian went to it,
and returned with Boyd. “Here's a good messenger to send for death,"
said he; “he wouldna hurry back," and the officer looked very sheepish.

“Where were you, sir?" asked Forbes, and Ninian laughed when they got
the explanation. The man, on going forth, had come on other hawks than
Peter and his friends—on Grant and half a dozen more at least, who
chased him all the way to Inverness, and kept him in a siege for hours
in a house where he took refuge.

“Well done!" cried Ninian. “Ye served my purpose better that way than
the way I planned, for ye took Pat Grant and his gentry out of my way at
the very time when I could best do wanting them."

Forbes sent the man off with a servant to get quarters for the night,
and in a little Æneas came with the women to the dining-room, and all of
them had a belated supper. For Ninian it was spoiled a little by his
sense of being out of some general secret understanding; Miss Forbes was
archly merry; Janet to himself was warmer than at any time since she had
come, but almost coldly formal to his friend Macmaster, who seemed quite
uplifted at the thought of leaving Inverness.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE RETURN.


Some hours before the house was wakened, Ninian took a stick, and out in
the sun-bright morning went along the shore till he found a boat owned
by a man who for a shilling took him up the frith to Tarradale, whence,
with a shepherd's stride, he made through grassy land to the Muir of
Ord. It was easy to find the croft of Fraser, even in that countryside
of crofts and swarming Frasers; the man's mishap had made it notable,
and every bairn the beachdair asked for guidance told him Fraser had
come home. But when he reached the cot, black-stoned and
heather-thatched, that had been reft so lately of its head, he found
himself set back in all his hopes by Fraser's family. Already they had
put him into hiding. Not all that Ninian could assure them of his
friendliness, or claim of gratitude for having got the man's release,
would move the sons; they had no trust in him. Their mother was more
frank, and answered freely several questions he put to her bearing on
her man's connection with Lord Lovat, but even she looked dubious and
askance at his rough appearance, and would not give the faintest inkling
where her husband lay.

Though he might have seemed to miss the object of his visit, Ninian
departed not dissatisfied with what he learned, and got to Bunchrew
House again by noon. The Advocate was gone to Inverness; already there
had come from him the clothing stolen from the inn; it had been found in
Fraser's cellars, none the worse except that Ninian's hat was cloured so
much it looked an ancient; whereon his daughter rallied him.

“Faith ay!" he said, a little rueful, “it looks a gey old hat for riding
in his lordship's chariot."

“Hoots! never mind!" Miss Forbes exclaimed. “The life of an old hat's
just to cock it, man!"

The first time for some days he shaved, and in the Lowland garb was once
again the proper gentleman. Miss Forbes was quite surprised to see the
difference. “Dear me!" she said, “ye're looking spruce! Ye're like the
lad—I thought him unco tousy in the kilts for girls to make such fash
about, but when he left a little since he was so tight and trim I could
have kissed him."

“And did ye no', m'em?" Ninian asked, amused.

“Na, na!" she said, and looked at Janet. “I didna dare. He wouldna thank
a rudas wife like me for kisses while there's young ones to be had for
askin'," and Janet coloured high.

Æneas, too, was gone to Inverness to finish off affairs with Saul
Mackay, who had but yesterday come home to find the youth amissing, and
distracted, spend a whole night's useless search for him. That afternoon
they all foregathered at Mackay's, left John Maclaren's clothes with him
to send through to the inn on Rannoch Moor when an occasion offered, and
having bade good-bye with Forbes's sister, walked with the convoy of
Forbes himself half-way to Daviot, where the coach was waiting.

It stood within a field in which the unyoked horses grazed—a massive
equipage which could have held a family, and round it gathered all the
people of the neighbouring farms, a horde astonished at this new device
to save the toil of walking. They stared at its interior, looking for a
fire,—a house so fine, they thought, must have a fire; they crept below
the axles curious to see the fastenings of this house which hung on
leathers. Children swung on the pole; the splendour of the wheels
provoked loud admiration.

“Poor souls!" said Forbes, compassionate, “they never guess the wheel's
to master them. The road that will take a coach will take a cannon."

They were almost the last words they had from him; a little later they
were on their way past great stone circles standing on the moor, above
them plovers crying. Behind them for a mile the children trotted. At
gloaming they were in Strath Nairn; in a loch at Moy the stars were
steeping; they rolled, some hours, through fir-woods dark and solemn
till they heard the Spey loud-thundering. That night they rested in an
inn at Aviemore.

So far it might have been a funeral. The road, though still unused, was
like a beach on which the great coach swung and jolted with an uproar of
its frame that made all speech impossible. For the first time Æneas
doubted if the new ways of the world were better than the old. He would
have loved to walk the moors, or through the darkening of the glens,
this girl beside him; help her at the fords, and share with her a
vagrant fire in desert places. Now Corryarrick and the wilds of
Badenoch, the Wicked Bounds, and dark Breadalbane's corried hills,
seemed preferable to journey through, for all their hazards; better than
this humdrum track on which was only that tame pleasure, comfort. Indeed
there was not even comfort here; his bones were sore with sitting in the
coach, with tossing in it like a dried pea in an infant's cogie.

Ninian and Janet sat before him; sometimes in the dark they were so
still he felt as in a dwaam, and, doubting they were present, would put
out a foot to feel. He took to Ninian at times a great repugnance. Whom
hitherto had seemed the cheeriest of companions now irked him like an
incubus; the devil fly away with such a dreary father!

And all the tune, though Æneas did not know, was Ninian uneasy as
himself—his one relief from weariness was trifling with a hank of
twine.

The next day was a Sabbath, and they could not travel, so they went to
kirk—a poor, bleak little kirk, with a cold prelection on eternal fires
from one who wept enough to drown out Tophet.

At daybreak on the Monday they pushed forward for Dalwhinnie over a wild
unfinished weal of road whereon Macgillivray's men were labouring. An
axle broke on the slope of Monadh Liath, and they were there cast out
for hours beside Loch Insh, a swelling of the Spey where wild-fowl
thronged. It was, for Æneas, the happiest day of all their journey. The
coachmen went on horseback for a smith, and, seeking all ways, failed to
get one nearer than Dalwhinnie, whence from the gusset of John Leggatt's
road to Corryarrick they brought back a lad who did the welding. While
thus delayed, afar from dwellings, Ninian made a fire, and started
fishing.

They were among a concourse of the hills, whose scarps were glistening
in a sun that gave the air at noon a blandness, though some snow was on
the bens. The river linked through crags and roared at linns; all
rusty-red and gold the breckans burned about them; still came like
incense from the gale-sprig perfume. They sat, those two young people,
by the fire, demure and blate at first, to find themselves alone. From
where they sat they could perceive down to the south the wrecks of Comyn
fortresses; the Road still red and new was like a raw wound on the
heather, ugly to the gaze, although it took them home. Apart from it,
and higher on the slope, a drove-track ran, bright green, with here and
there on it bleached stones worn by the feet of by-past generations.
They saw them both—the Old Road and the New—twine far down through the
valley into Badenoch, and melt into the vapours of the noon. And
something in the prospect brought the tears to Janet's eyes.

“For why should I be sad?" she asked him suddenly, “to see that old
track of the people and the herd, and this new highway
boasting—boasting——?"

She could not utter more, she was so shaken.

“I think I know," said Æneas, sharing in her spirit. “I could weep
myself to think our past is there. Where men have walked are always left
the shades of them—their spirits lingering. To your eyes and to mine is
nothing on the old drove-road but grass and boulder, but if there's
aught of the immortal in men's souls, there's the immortal likewise in
their earthly acts. Our folk are on the old drove-road—the ghosts of
them, the hunters and the tribes long-perished to the eye,
doain'-uasail and broken men. It's history!"

“That's just it!" she cried, “and I hate the New Road—hate it!—hate
it!"

“There is something in me, too, that little likes it. It means the end
of many things, I doubt, not all to be despised,—the last stand of
Scotland, and she destroyed. And yet—and yet, this New Road will some
day be the Old Road, too, with ghosts on it and memories. In a thousand
years will you and I be sitting by Loch Insh——"

He broke off with a smile.

“Indeed, and that would be a dreich sit!" she said, half-mocking, but it
was to hide her deeper feelings.

Her father was far down the water plying a fruitless quest. They saw him
trudge the banks, surrendered to his passion; they might be clean
forgotten. A squad of soldiers once came marching past as if from
Ruthven barracks and looked at them and at the coach with wonder. A
fellow with a gun, a dog behind him, showed on the drove-track for a
moment, shouted something out to them, and disappeared into the hills.
They heard the red deer belling.

To while the time that Æneas would have stay for ever (as he thought)
they looked for berries. He was like a boy, so gleeful, searching
shrubs, and she so grave even in their slightest chattering. In her was
something sweetly wild, like to the tang of myrtle blown across the moor
to mingle with prosaic scents—a breath of growths unsoiled, a cry of
ancientry that shook some chord in him no other thing in life had
reached.

They talked of many things, but most of that bewildering discovery about
his father; a score of times she turned to it when he, regarding it as
something out of key with other moods within him at the moment, changed
the topic, and at the last, to his astonishment he found a new light
break on him.

For reasons of his own—or likelier for the want of opportunity—her
father had not told him of her visit to Prim Campbell; he was thus in
dark about the later evidence of Duncanson's rascality. Till now he had
not thought of Duncanson as at the back of this past week's events
whereof himself was victim; he had ascribed them all to Lovat's
vengeance upon Ninian, the desperate resorts of one who meant at any
cost to cloud his knavery. Not once had it occurred to him that
Duncanson might have communication with Lord Lovat, and urge on this
mysterious persecution. Ninian had not even hinted at the possibility.
But this account of letters hurrying over Corryarrick after them, to
turn a man not previously unfriendly into an unscrupulous kidnapper, all
in an evening's time, upset him greatly.

The Grange affair which Janet next laid bare was also new to him. At
first he thought it might account for things, but she dispelled that
notion. She had a way of knitting brows and cogitating, like her father,
when a problem offered; she did so only for a moment now.

“No, no!" she said, “that is not it!—at least it is not all of it. They
had no reason to think you or my father likely to find that shame. The
fears of Duncanson began when you left Inveraray and he learned where
you were going. It put him on his back; when I left home he was a
bedfast man."

“Your father's right!" said Æneas. “There something in that desk
Drimdorran thinks I saw, exposing all his infamy."

They had come again back to the fire that cheerily crackled. She poked
it with a stick which she had picked up in the heather, nothing saying
for a little.

“Was the desk the start of Duncanson's vexation?" she inquired at last,
with hesitation, not looking at him.

His heart leaped frightfully. Did she know about the dovecote? Had
Ninian told her he had been with Margaret there? It was the last thing
he would have her know—that incident, and yet he felt he must seem
frank lest she should know already and attach to it a wrong importance.

“The desk is mixed up with the doocot," he said simply, mastering his
alarms. “I was there that night, quite innocent, and Duncanson found
out."

She reddened; he saw it though her back was to him; that of itself was
most disquieting, though she had not hid all further interest in the
dovecote. What he had said was trivial, unfinished, like to rouse her
questioning, but she passed it by.

“Ah, well!" she said in an altered tone, “the doocot or the
desk—between them lies the mystery; it's too involved for me," and
seemed relieved to hear the clatter of the horsemen coming back with one
to mend the carriage.

From that hour on, the journey home to Æneas was miserable. The very
weather changed, as in a humour to depress him more. An inn of Wade's
they spent the night in at Dalwhinnie let the rain through its
unfinished roof and shook till morning with wild blasts of tempest.

Next day they got to Taymouth, where great woods were blown like corn
and fields were flooded; the Road was soft as butter and their wheels
ran deep, while, on the drove-track close beside, the folk who came to
see them trotted dry of foot. At that was Ninian merry. “There's your
roads for ye!" said he; “I doubt George hasna got the bottom though he
has the breadth! The old folk werena fools!"

That night they spent in Stirling, where they left the coach, and hiring
horses, rode through Drymen into Lennox, and in two days more got home.

The sun was setting on the hills when they got round the bay below
Dunchuach; a flag was on the castle tower.

“MacCailein's home!" said Ninian. “It's time for him! He little thinks
what crops grow in his absence. Weeds!—just pushion weeds! But I'll put
the hook to them!"




CHAPTER XXIX.

CANDLE-LIGHT.


That night, while it was early yet, Drimdorran walked about his house,
with hose untied and flopped down round his ankles like a tinkler man's.
In every nook and chamber, every landing of a stair and twist of
passage, there were candles burning. He tended them himself. He tended
them as though they were his final days. When, sometimes, he would come
on one that guttered low, and looked like dying, he would give a crazy
twittering cry—most eerie!—pluck a fresh one from a pouch that he had
filled with dips, to light it with a trembling hand, and nurse the new
flame with his palms about it, labouring in his breath, his bosom
heaving. He stared into the lowes of them with apprehensive eyes, but
not so fearful as he peered at windows, shutterless, that had the black
night squatted on their sills.

Since dusk had fallen had he thus been busy—gardener of the candles; so
had he ministered, a week of evenings, to this curious passion. Nobody
dare tend them save himself; his household sat down in the stanchioned
under-storey, whispering, or they lay awake at night and listened to his
shuffling from room to room, and ever and anon would shiver at his
twittering cry.

He slept, himself, but in the mornings, when the dawn was come, and
through the forepart of the day, but fitfully, and all the common duties
of the house were stopped to meet a daft demand for candles. He never
ceased to cry for candles—candles—candles! They made them in a cellar
at the back, beside the brew-house—dips and moulds; himself came down
to them a score of times a day to urge them on, to stretch the wicks
with them, and slice down tallow. He counted every candle made as if it
were a guinea. The cellar's shelves were stacked with them; the moulds
were never cool; the tallow always simmered, yet he cried for more.

There was, in this craze of his, for those who had to surfer its
inconvenience, some quality of mystery that latterly oppressed the house
like fever. His servants were afraid. It was not him they feared, poor
man! but the house itself, so monstrously aglow night after night and
all night long, with no discoverable meaning in its waste of light.
They, too, would look askance at windows, cautiously open doors, and
start up tremulous at a rap. They loathed this riot of illumination, yet
were nigh as sedulous as himself in snuffing candles when his back was
turned.

In all else save this strange extravagance he seemed rational, though
something of a shattered body. He had had, as they thought, a stroke, on
the week of Michaelmas; since then he had not left the house except one
night when they had found him in the grounds, bedewed and maundering, in
his gown. He kept his correspondence going; sat on term-day, dressed, in
the business closet, lifting rents for Islay with his old alertness; he
had the shrewdest eye on all that happened round about him, and would
talk on anything, by day, with great composure, even when he dipped the
candles; only the night unmanned him, and his craze attained its summit.

They set it all down to a stroke more stunning than the palsy—he had
lost his daughter, and had proved himself unfit to keep a ward. Margaret
and Islay's son had gone away together, only a letter left behind to say
they went to England. It was a blow, undoubtedly; the lass had been the
apple of his eye, and this precipitation of a union he had cherished
ruined all his plans for her; the thing to any worldly eye would seem a
scheme himself devised, and Islay, now abroad, would be implacable.

He did not wince, Drimdorran, when he read the letter (so they said),
but after that he never dressed nor trimmed himself, but went about the
house dishevelled in a tattered gown, his hose slipped down his shanks,
his face like parchment, and his eyelids flaming red. No step was taken
to discover where the fugitives had gone; he never mentioned them; it
was as if he cast them from his mind.

This night, since gloaming, he had sped about the business of the
candles, shuffling from room to room with snuffers in his hand, and
coming back between each round to quaff at water from a pitcher in his
closet. Its window had a tartan plaid tacked to the lintel—something
new; for usual it was left uncurtained. No breath of air came in, and
with a fire that burned high up the chimney, and the candles stuck
around, the heat was stifling.

He had come back to rest him and to drink, and sank down in a chair with
elbows on his desk. He leaned his head on hands, and there, as overcome
by weariness or woe, sat breathing heavily.

A dog outside began at barking.

He started up, and drawing back the tartan screen, looked out into the
darkness. The stars were shining bright above his property; so do they
twinkle on the garden and the tomb alike, on trysts in country lanes and
men tormented. Beyond the fields, indifferent, sang Aray to the sea.

There came a rattle at the entrance door, and hearing that he gave the
twittering cry and skipped about the room and wrung his hands. A voice
was on the stair, and footsteps in the lobby; with effort he sat down
and put the pitcher to his lips.

“Come in!" he mumbled, on a knock; the Muileach opened; Ninian Campbell
entered, still the stour of travel on his clothes.

“My God!" cried Duncanson.

The Muileach left and shut the door. They looked at one another for a
moment, Ninian like a gled, his eyebrows meeting, not a word from him.
He saw a ruined man.

For twenty years had Duncanson to him seemed made of granite or the
whin—proud jowl and haughty eye, trim habit and stiff frame; he had
been so when last he saw him. Now was he like curds that shiver in a
basin. 'Twas almost unbelievable a man in three or four weeks' time
could shrivel so and look so much a wreck of what he was, and yet be
living. What most astonished was that he should look like pulp, and yet
his knuckles gleam with bone, the veins of his temples stretch on a
craggy skull. It is the heart that stiffens, and the heart was gone.

“Tha 'm fear so air falbh!—This man's away with it!" said Ninian to
himself in Gaelic, and for a moment felt some pity.

“I thought ye had been drowned!" said Duncanson, and every nerve of him
was quivering.

Ninian gave a girn; to pity such a thing were folly. “Na," said he, and
sat him down, unasked, “but gey and close on't! MacCailein nearly lost
his beachdair in Loch Laggan. Ye heard of it?"

Drimdorran nodded. It was as if he could not speak. Through white gums
parted showed his tongue, extraordinarily thickened, moving, but as mute
as wood.

“Ye're not well, sir," said Ninian. “I see that ye have had a shake.
They told me in the town."

Drimdorran waved his hands. “I'm an ill man," said he, a husky voice
recovered. “It would shake any man, ill or well, to see a ghost." He
fumbled in his gown, and got a mull, and drenched himself with snuff,
then gave a glance about him at the candles.

“There's no' as much o' the ghost in me as would fright a bairn!" said
Ninian. “Ye didna get my letter, then, from Corryarrick?"

“No," said Duncanson, and gulped, and Ninian looked at him with a
peculiar air.

“I sent one, then," said he, “explaining everything. It's likely on the
road. I only got home myself an hour ago, to find I was a ghost for
Inveraray."

“And him that was along with ye?—Macmaster?" said Drimdorran, writhing
at his hands.

“I lost him."

“Lost him! Where, man, where?"

“The strangest thing, Drimdorran! Ye see I came on him at Bridge of
Orchy, and the two of us went North together. Oh, man, but we had the
mischief's time! First the Watch of Barisdale came round us nibbling
like fleas in hose, and then it was Loch Laggan with Macdonalds snapping
at our heels. We won away from that and over Corryarrick into Inverness,
and there the very devil seemed in every step we took——"

“Yes, yes, yes, yes! But ye say ye lost him!"

“I did. He was dragged on board a vessel."

Whatever blood was left in the recesses of Drimdorran's frame now gushed
into his face. He purpled at the cheeks; the veins along his temples
stood out thick and blue; he swallowed. And his eyes grew big and
bright. He put the pitcher to his head and drank from it; its spilth
streamed down his chin and soaked his breast.

Ninian watched him curiously.

Drimdorran put the pitcher down and sighed. “Ah!" said he, “I'm an ill
man, Ninian Campbell; the least thing staggers. Who was it took
Macmaster?"

“A man called Grant from out of Rothiemurchus. Yon's a rascal place,
Drimdorran! They make a trade of picking young men up for the
plantations; they would have picked myself up too, but for my own
manœuvring."

The most astonishing change was come on Duncanson. His eyes were
dancing. “A good riddance!" said he. “I'm through wi' him, at any rate!
But this'll be a blow to Bailie Alan! What was the young one doin'
North?"

“I'll tell ye that!" said Ninian agreeably. “He went up on his uncle's
business, wi' pockets full o' money; that's what played the mischief.
Yon's no place for flourishing the sporran; and I warned him. Well,
anyway, his uncle had great notions of the Road to open trade on; Æneas
was to look about and see what business might be done in wintering.
There's something in't for trade, perhaps, but no' much in the Road for
pleasure; I came back that way, and many a time in coming damned George
Wade. There's nothing beats the old drove-track!"

Drimdorran screwed his face up. “That's what I think too," said he, and
checked himself; then slyly glanced at Ninian. “I like," said he, “a
good thick wall of hills between us and the North. The less we have to
do with it the better."

“That's just what I was thinking to myself; for all that, Badenoch's no'
canny for a beachdair."

“Your girl went off, I'm told, to search for you, and Bailie Alan later
at her heels."

Ninian smiled. “Alan mounts," said he, “a good half hundredweight more
beef than Janet. He hadna much o' a chance, wi' that, to run her down.
She's back with me; she came to Inverness, and I'll wager the Bailie's
still about Loch Laggan dragging for his nephew."

Up got Drimdorran then and seized a stick with which he pounded on the
floor. “Ye'll need to have a dram," said he, as cheery as a man new come
to fortune. “I'm vexed for young Macmaster, but ye ken he was a rascal."

“Ye mean the snuffbox?" Ninian said. “He never took it. I charged him
wi't as soon's I met him on the Orchy, and he nearly struck me down.
It's in your desk!"

Duncanson turned round. “Did he say that? Did he say that?" he cried.

“No," said Ninian; “I guessed. Whether it's there or no', Macmaster
hasna got it."

“He was in my desk!"

“Not him, Drimdorran! He never had a hand in't."

“I'm telling ye he took a key from out this desk, and opened up the
doocot."

“He didna. I'll let ye ken the truth, Drimdorran, though Macmaster
wouldna. The whole thing started wi' a cantrip o' your daughter's. She
and Campbell werena in the mood that night for lessons. 'Twas she who
got the doocot key, and Æneas, looking for her, found her in the
doocot."

The old man stood with his hand on the back of his chair a minute,
speechless. Incomprehension, light awakening, doubt, conviction, and
dismay successively showed in his aspect; last of all, an air of relief
that puzzled Ninian.

“Ah!" he said at last, “I have it now! . . . The randy!" He plucked his
hose up from his ankles, ran his hands through his whisp of hair, and
took a drink. For the first time was his manner like the old Drimdorran
Ninian best knew.

“I was all astray! I never dreamt of that! From the start I blamed
Macmaster, and she never said a word to change my mind. I was sure it
had been him—that he had rummaged. There's many a thing in this desk of
mine that's no' for prying eyes—you understand?—the Duke's affairs:
there was in't that night some State concerns that, blabbed too soon,
would bring confusion to his Grace and ruin to me."

“I see!" said Ninian gravely. “It well might make ye anxious."

“Ye were here yourself that night; ye'll mind I left ye for a little? I
saw, from the window there, the doocot lighted, and jaloused. I went to
the door of it, to find all dark; but I felt the smell of a smouldered
candle, and I knew there was some one there. The thing so staggered me,
that I should have a spy on my very hearthstone, I couldna speak, and I
left without a word."

“Just that!" said Ninian. “Man, that was a pity! If you had got them to
declare themselves it would have saved misunderstanding. Macmaster
couldna guess what ailed ye at him; he had done no wrong."

“I see that now, but think of my position! My desk was riped; the siller
box was gone; ye would yersel' have been the last to blame a
daughter. . . . Ye've heard she's off wi' Campbell?"

Ninian nodded. “Youth," said he. “It'll soon blow by!"

“Na, na!" said Duncanson, with bitterness; “it'll no' blow by. What will
his family think? That I connived at his entangling, and him my ward.
His Grace came home to-day—they tell me, furious. I havena seen him
yet; I canna!"

He broke down utterly. His voice trailed off to a whimper; the tears ran
down his face and he was leaning on the desk, a spectacle of shabby
grief.

“For what do we breed children? Is it to plague and torture us? I gave
her all indulgence; I moiled and toiled for her, and granted her every
whim; improved this property, and starved myself for it that bairns of
hers might have some cause to mind their grandfather. I come off a good
stock——"

“Mo chreach! we all do that in Gaeldom!" said Ninian, shrugging.

“——A good family, though in the money bit of it declined before my
time. My grief was that I hadna got a son. But even through a daughter I
could make a name to last beside Loch Fyne—Drimdorran. For that I would
jeopard life, one time, and sell my very soul!"

He beat on the desk with a bony hand; he was clean swept off with
feeling, and Ninian himself was a little moved.

“And now it's done!" said Duncanson. He took the stick and thumped again
the floor for an attendant. “It's finished! She has ruined all."

“Indeed and it wasna nice of her to leave the blame on Æneas," said
Ninian. “It might have ruined him. The ugliest thing of it all was that
damned snuffbox."

Drimdorran sighed. “Had I but known," said he, “the snuffbox cleared
Macmaster. I found it two days later in the desk in a drawer where I
never put it, so far as I could mind. But still there was the doubt, I
might have put it there myself. I see now Margaret did it. She got my
keys again."

The entrance of the Muileach interrupted. He came with a tray, a bottle
of spirits, glasses, and a kettle; placed them on the table and retired,
a customary evening office.

Drimdorran brewed. His hand shook as he filled the glasses. Ninian
looked closely at him fiddling round the tray, surprised to see how
greatly he had rallied in the last five minutes. The look of doom was
gone from him, his back was stiffened, and though the outburst of a
moment since concerning Margaret might naturally have left him dull, he
actually seemed livened. There are men who brighten at the first glimpse
of a bottle, but Duncanson was not that kind, and Ninian knew it. The
man was inwardly rejoiced at something. As for himself, he sweated in
the chamber's heat and longed for a release. He wondered at this
multitude of candles, and the tartan screen particularly commanded his
attention.

“And now," said Duncanson, his brewing finished, pushing a steaming
glass across the table to his visitor; “take that, and tell me how ye
sped in Inverness. I heard ye got some guns."

Ninian half-shut his eyes and cracked his fingers, quite unconscious
that he did so.

“I did," said he; “but who could tell ye that?"

Drimdorran for a moment hung; his eyebrows knitted.

“The man who came from Badenoch to tell me ye were drowned," said he.

“Oh yes!" said Ninian. “I see! Of course that would be the way of it.
Yes, I got a pickle guns, Drimdorran—three hundred stands in a heather
chapel on Loch Laggan-side. They werena worth a spittle—broken pieces
out of Holland. But there's a splendid trade in them; George Wade gives
a pound apiece." He twinkled. His glance for Duncanson was very sly.
“They're the first trade the New Road's brought to Badenoch. I'll have
to mention it to Islay, but I'm sweir."

Drimdorran looked uneasy, plowtering with his ladle in the glass that
tinkled to his shaking like a bell. The tone of Ninian was much too
confidential.

“Are ye sure of this?" Drimdorran asked a little weakly.

“Tach!" said Ninian, and stirred his drink. “As sure as death! I saw
Himself; he didna take the trouble to deny it. But he said there was
more than him in't."

“Ninian," said Drimdorran, and leaned across the table, “did he mention
me?"

“His lordship's quite discreet. He mentioned nobody."

Drimdorran rose and snuffed a candle. He bent across his guest. “There's
money in't," he whispered, “both for you and me. And it's not against
the law, as ye say yourself. I've known it for a year. There's money
in't! There's money in't!" He clenched his fists and shook them.

“That's what I was thinking to myself," said Ninian calmly. “If Wade's
so keen on guns, just let him have them! He's just an Englishman."

“I can get ye a part in this. Mind, now, it's deadly private! It would
never do to placard Lovat, and his wife a Campbell. Say not a word about
it; let Islay think the guns are for a Rising if he likes."

“Very good!" said Ninian, stirring with his ladle, drinking nothing.

And then there came his final opportunity.

Duncanson had got into his chair again and quite a new man from the
wreck he seemed when Ninian entered, quaffed his liquor, smacking with
his lips. A candle flickered out, and he saw it, but he paid no heed.
Now conscious of his flopping hose, he pulled them up, and snuffed with
gusto.

“Did ye see anybody else in Inverness?" said he. So far, no sign had
come from him of interest in Macmaster's fate, and Ninian felt grim.

“I gave a cry on Forbes."

Drimdorran winced. He could not hide it.

“It wasna about the guns?" he asked with some anxiety.

“I went to him about another matter altogether," Ninian said. “I got the
strangest story on my way up North, and I went to him to ask about it.
Duncan's a clever man, and not much misses him, but here he was no use
to me. The drollest thing took place on the Moor of Rannoch.
Col-of-the-tricks came down on us—a man with a leather coat and a
boaster's feathers, and what was he on but to stop my passage? Just
listen you to this, Drimdorran! I had Macmaster with me. Barisdale had
never seen the lad before, and still he knew his stock whenever he clapt
eyes on him. That man is just a dirt, and I wouldna trust his word upon
the steel, but he said something yonder gave me thinking."

He got up and walked the floor, with three steps up and three steps down
like a beast in cage. Drimdorran sat bent forward, sunken at the chest.

“The thing was this. He knew Macmaster's father. They had fenced
together. And where should they fence, do ye think, but in Castle
Dounie? It was after Glenshiel, and Paul had a wounded arm. Are ye
following?"

The glass of Duncanson upset. Its liquor spilled across the table, ran
over the edge, and made a puddle on the floor. A plashing sound made
Ninian look down; the old man's heel was drumming in the puddle, out of
his control.

“Is there anything in it, do ye think?" he asked, in a queer flat voice.

“There's in it that the man was never drowned!" said Ninian. “He went
abroad. We found it out from Lovat."

Duncanson got on his feet and reached for the water-jug. “A dubious
tale," said he,—“unless—unless, like the son, they shipped him."

“But the son's no' shipped!" said Ninian. “I got him off, and he's home
in Inveraray."

As if the legs were cut from him, the old man dropped. The chair had
been against his knees; he plumped into the cushions with a jar that
shook the floor, and he gave the twittering cry. And then of a sudden he
got up, put his palms across his ears, and shuffled from the room.




CHAPTER XXX.

A SEARCH.


Ninian stood five minutes waiting his return. In the midst of the house
he heard a door go bang. He plucked at the tartan curtain; raised it;
opened a window pane and held his face against the breeze.

The desk next tempted him. The key was in its lock; his hand went to it,
but some sentiment restrained him and he turned his back on the
temptation.

Plainly Duncanson had no thought of returning. His guest took up the
glass which he had not drank from, and emptied its contents upon the
fire; then out and through the lobby and down the stair in a blaze of
guttering candles. He quit the house.

Having walked across the gravel to the grass, he stood for a little,
pondering. The house lay in a flood of light; it gushed from every
window, even from the attics, very strange to see. In that wide solitary
haugh of glen so dark itself, without another house, it seemed
preposterous. It might have been a dwelling of rejoicings, only that
festive sound was missing. He searched his memory and was beat to
recollect that he had ever seen it lit like this before. Since Duncanson
had come to it, at least, it had no social gleam; there never had been
dancing there, though the parish danced in winter-time in every loft,
nor yet a supper for the tenants. Black Sandy, when a younger man, was
no way slack at gaiety, and when he lived in town had many an evening
ploy in Fisherland, but that all stopped when he became a laird.

For what should a craze take the shape of such silly waste of candles?
In a grasping man—and Sandy had always a grasping
reputation—extravagance was not the natural thing to look for should
the man turn daft. And yet there must be something—Candles? . . .
Candles? . . . A thrifty man. . . . What freak of memory in a madman
would suggest the candles?

The beachdair drummed on his teeth with his finger-nails, and tried to
make himself an old man crazed, and think of things that through the
labyrinth of an old man's brain might lead to a candle passion. Though
mighty curious, when in the house, to see such blazing round him, he had
not showed, even by a glance, that he thought it odd. He had not asked
the Muileach, when he first arrived, what it might mean. It would not
have been good Highland manners to say anything, even though the candles
had been ten feet long. But now they cried importunate for explanation.

Instead of starting off down through the garden, he went quietly on the
grass about the gable of the house. It had a fosse or ditch, some four
feet deep, to light the basement. There were windows in it at the back,
some of them built up, but the others glazed and lighted; this was the
kitchen quarters. Beyond the kitchen windows, however, was one a bit
apart which he knew to be the Muileach's. He picked some pebbles up and
threw them at the glass.

In a little the man came out, and up some steps to reach the level. It
was because gravel is plentiful, and nights are dark, and human beings
will go courting, that stanchions are on basement windows. He thought he
had caught the lover of a kitchen-girl, and was quite aback to find the
Messenger.

“Dhe! is it you that's in't?" he said, confounded.

“Tell me this!" said Ninian, and took his sleeve. “In the name of
fortune, what's this great parade of candles?"

“You may well ask that!" said the Muileach. “We're rendering the very
kitchen-fee."

“Tach! Never mind the kitchen-fee!" said Ninian, impatient. “Thou needst
not want for that so long as the castle jack is going. What is thy
master meaning, blazing there?"

“It is aye for some end of her own the cat croons. Myself I cannot tell
you; but I wish to fate I was back to the Islands!"

“Is he frightened?" Ninian asked.

For a second or two the man said nothing, his hand on the railing of the
fosse.

“There's nothing wrong with him," said he at last, “except at night, and
then, mo chreach! he's in the horrors."

“Another thing," said Ninian hurriedly. “What does he want with a
curtain on his window? He never used to have it, and it's nailed."

“If I could tell you that I would be wise. Day and night it's there, and
it's never lifted."

“He's a done man!" said Ninian, reflecting.

They talked for a little longer and then he took his leave.

He went down the grounds; across the fields; took a short cut to the
dovecote. The stars were thick as dust. Some young roe-deer were from
the hill, he came upon them browsing. They fled before him. To the west
Craig Dubh rose black with plumage of the fir, in whose midst were
night-birds questioning. There was a little frost.

He had never been in the cote, for his interest lay in the bold and
wild, not innocence and pigeons, but he knew its outward features, and
even in the thicket's gloom he walked straight to the door. It was
locked; he had not expected otherwise. On finding this he went down to
the river's bank; walked up the water for a bit, and came on a drifted
tree, a thin young birch. With his knife he lopped its branches, then
carried it to the cote and thrust it at the window, which fell in. With
the tree for ladder he got up, squeezed through the narrow opening, and
dropped. He landed beside the bin.

Having struck a light to tinder, he fed it to the lantern; looked about
him; opened the lid of the bin and searched it, even below the moulded
grain; emptied the sacks of their mildewed corn till it piled up to his
ankles. The dust rose round him in a cloud; he sneezed.

When he had finished here he got up the ladder through the hatch to the
second storey, and there came on other boxes, a barrel without a lid
half full of pitch, and a mattress filled with feathers. He searched in
everything; the boxes were the lumber of a flitting, and held musty
papers. He turned them out and found them drafts of tacks, which he put
to the closest scrutiny. They were read to the very testing clause, and
then thrown back; there was nothing in them.

Nor yet was he done. He went to the topmost storey where he stood below
the sarking, stooped, his head against the beams. Nothing was there at
all but the soil of doves; he turned to leave, then noticed something
that had hitherto escaped him—every pigeon-hole was boarded up. In this
there was some apparent interest, for he put his lantern down, took out
his knife, and cut a skelf from the boarding of one hole, and chewed it.

To get out of the place without the tree to help was not so easy as to
enter; he got upon the bin and made a great attempt, gave up at last,
and felt in the dark about the door. The bolt of the lock was shot in an
iron staple which could be levered out; he thought of the mattocks,
groped for one, and putting the pick-point in the staple, forced it at a
push. When that was done and the door stood open, he hammered the staple
loosely back; whoever should find the door unlocked would think it
carelessness. But the door itself, shut to, he jammed at the foot with
stones. His last precaution was to take the tree and throw it in the
river.

The wind was from the north and stirred the thicket, which shed no
longer leaves, since all were blown and scattered. They rustled below
his feet. He stood a little, and stared at the flaring house. A wild-cat
on the Scaurnoch wailed. Dark shapes of cattle moved on the farther
bank. The river brawled, but yet above its brawling sounded something to
the north that had an echoing beat as if of metal.

As it came sounding closer, Ninian moved up beside the road, and stooped
to get between him and the stars the figure of a man who trotted on a
horse.

“Sin thu, Alan, it's thyself!" he thought, and cried the Bailie's
name.

“Is't you that's there, Ninian?" said the rider, pulling up.

“That same! I put a welcome on ye. Man of my heart, but ye ride heavy! I
heard ye a mile away."

Alan-Iain-Alain Og got off the horse and painfully stretched his legs;
he rode with a short Kintyre stirrup.

His first words were of Æneas and Janet; when he heard that they were
home he was much relieved. His own experience had no stirring incident;
in that respect he found his journey very different from Ninian's. On
the road, with the reins looped in his hands, he gave a brief account of
what befell.

He had been from home on the forenoon when the news came from Loch
Laggan, and Janet had three hours' start of him, with no clear notion
left behind of how she meant to go. At the head of Loch Awe there was no
one who had seen her pass, and he was in a quandary, but he reasoned
that her goal would be Loch Laggan, and he rode up through Glen Orchy to
the inn, where he stayed the night. She had not passed the inn; it was
clear now she had gone down through Glen Dochart, but he kept on his way
to the Black Mount, eastward by the Cruach to Loch Laidon, whence he
turned to reach Loch Treig and up the Spean to Badenoch.

“How long did ye take to get to Loch Laggan?" Ninian asked.

“Three mortal days!" said the Bailie, groaning. “And my skin's not
mended yet."

“Janet beat ye! She took only four to Inverness."

He had with him in wallets the key to every pass in the wilder
Highlands—some sweetmeats and tobacco, and to give his coming a hue of
unconcern he pushed inquiries everywhere regarding cattle, posturing as
a dealer. Wherever he went he found folk hospitable: Badenoch came
trooping to make terms with the Merchant Mór. In the hamlet of Druimbeg
he spent a night in the very house where Ninian and Æneas had supper,
and in Druimbeg he learned that they were safe. They had been seen on
Tarffside on their way to Inverness.

“I thought of going to Inverness myself," he said, with a lift of the
shoulders, “but the snow, they said, was three feet deep on Corryarrick,
and I'm too thick in the girth, mo thruaigh! to face the drift, so I
just came home."

“The best thing ye could do!" said Ninian with conviction. “Yon's no' a
place for Christian men."

“It took me two days at Loch Laggan finding out what I was after, for I
had to use some caution. They fed me on kippered fish and ham till I was
parched so dry I could have drank the loch, and then I took my leave of
them and through Lochaber into Appin. I spent last night with the
tacksman at Bonaw."

To this itinerary had Ninian listened with an absent air, his eyes on
the glowing mansion hung up in the dark where it seemed at times to rise
and float.

“Isn't that the great house?" he said when the Bailie finished. “There's
a stone of candles burning in't this minute."

“It made me wonder," said the Bailie, looking up. “I saw the scad of it
beyond Carlunan. Is there some Occasion?"

“I canna think of one," said Ninian, “except that another man is going
to keep his daughter after this." He caught the Bailie by the arm and
squeezed it, whispering. “I've just been there. Drimdorran's fey! Ye
never saw a man more under weather. The shroud's upon the breast of
him!"

“I heard about his daughter and young Campbell," said the Bailie. “That
a blow to Sandy!"

“It's not the only one, I'm thinking, nor yet the worst. I gave him a
blow myself this night that shook him to the found."

“Ye'll tell me all of that wi' a bite of supper," said the Bailie, and
turned for the horse's mane. He gripped it with one hand and with the
other caught a stirrup.

“Stop you!" said Ninian. “I've news for ye that's no' for bellowing to a
man cocked on a horse. If you will just play legs wi' me, and lead the
beast, I'll tell ye something I told your wife a little ago, and it left
her dumb."

With a last glance at the lighted house they walked down the road
together.

Ninian first recounted how he had got home, with a verdict on the Road
as the dullest he had travelled, and then swerved back to the affair
with Barisdale.

“I heard about that at Buachaille Etive, at the inns," said the Bailie,
“and I couldna make heid nor tail of it. I know that Col's a rogue, but
his booty's cattle, or the cess the cock-lairds pay him for blackmail.
What could he want wi' you?"

He stopped, with an alarming inspiration. “Ye're no' goin' to say it was
my nephew's money?" he exclaimed.

“Na, na!" said Ninian, “it wasna that. The money's safe and sound,
though it gave me manys a fright. . . . Keep on! It's better
walking. . . . Col was put on my track by a fellow from Glen Strae. Ye
wouldna think they were so clever in Glen Strae? Ye would wonder what a
body in Glen Strae would herd a man like Col on to a Messenger-at-Arms
for? I never plied my trade in Strae in all my life—I couldna. It was
once my people's and their bones are there, and the folk there now are
not to blame that we are landless. . . . Well, well, coma leat!—the
lad and me took the twist of Col, and got to Badenoch, and ye ken what
happened yonder. 'Tis he can flash the pistol! We left some work for
women there, and to make my story short, we got to Inverness. It's a
bonny town enough if one were looking at it from a steeple, but get to
the guts of it and it's a different story. I mean in the quirks of men.
There's a spider yonder, hoved up in the belly, sitting in a net that's
spread from ben to ben, and has a string the length of Inveraray. The
whole time we were there he kept us skipping. We were leaguered in our
inn by ruffians, my head was split, and Æneas was carried on a vessel.
If it wasna he was smart to swing an eitch I wasna here this night, and
he was on the way to Carolina."

“Dhe! that's a fearful story!" said Alan-Iain-Alain Og, astonished.

“It's no' a story yet; it's just the start of two. I'm glad ye're home,
Macmaster! I'm here wi' a tangled hank that's worse than the search for
Duncan Cameron in Lochaber, and I'll want a hand. Ye're wondering to
yourself, I'll swear, the spider's name. Who is it throws a web across
the North and catches flies and ships them off, and feels a quiver of
the net, ay, even as far as Inveraray?"

“Ye're meaning Simon Fraser!"

“Just him! Trusdar! Filth!" cried Ninian, fierce. “Oh-h-h man, if he
were young and I had just his thrapple!" He grated with his teeth. “But
there's two beasts at the web—Lovat and another, and the other glues
the strings in Inveraray—Alasdair Dubh."

“Black Sandy!" said the Bailie, stopping his horse. They were in the
midst of trees.

“Just him! He might well sit wakened all night long wi' lights; by day
he's at the weaving—here a strand, and there a strand; one in Islay's
mail-bags and the other up to Dounie; one in MacCailein's castle, and
the other among the clans. Give me a besom till I sweep him down!"

Macmaster clicked his tongue. “I never thought much of Sandy, but he's
surely no so deep as that?"

“To the very eyes! He thought this night he had me. 'There's money in't
for us,' says he: I had him open like a mussel ye would shell! Little
does MacCailein know the snake he's warming! This is the way of it,
Alan—Lovat is shipping arms from Holland to the Forth, old scabby
muskets, no' a belch left in them. They come up the Road in creels, like
haddocks, and a widdie of them's dropped off here and there in the
slyest glens to wait for market. Beef's cheap the now, but iron's up in
price, and more's to be made of iron since ye needna fatten't. When
fair-day comes at Ruthven, and Fort Augustus, and Fort William, Donald
comes up in the name of the Disarming Act wi' the faithful weapon of his
fathers on a string, and gets a pound for it from the English sodgers.
It wouldna cost a shilling in Amsterdam! The clansmen get the credit o'
being loyal, escape a search that would discover what they have hid
below the thatch, and Lovat shares the pound wi' them, and clears a
profit on his cargo."

“I don't believe it!" said the Bailie firmly. “He's maybe rogue, but not
in that packman fashion."

“Trade, Alan! Trade! What's the Road for, if it's no' for trade? I
always thought that trade demanded cunning! But do ye no' see that the
packman bit of it is least important? He wants to keep the real stuff in
the thatch; he doesna want the North disarmed no more than he wants
roads and schools. So long's the North has gun and claymore ready, Simon
is king beyond the Spey. It's no' for the money he's in the trade wi'
Holland, but it's for his share in the money Sandy is in the pact."

“It's like enough."

“I'll warrant ye! Sim would be a poor spider wanting the help of Sandy.
The whole affairs of Islay and the Duke come under his eye: he milks
their mail-bags, and will whiles send up a cheese to Sim. There's no' a
move in politics but Simon's warned; that's the way ye find him first on
one leg, then the other. I know now who spoiled many a jaunt to the
North for me by leakage. And this time it was him put Barisdale across
my track."

“Isn't that the rogue!" cried Alan.

“Oh, but there's more than that! Far more than that! He had his knife in
Æneas. It was at his command Lord Lovat lifted us. Barisdale was
watching only me. When it came to Inverness, though, Lovat was far more
keen on gripping Æneas, and that had nothing at all to do wi' the trade
in guns. . . . I want to ask ye this: did your brother go to France? I'm
meaning Paul."

*        *        *        *        *

They stopped on the road again; the horse cropped stunted grass in a
happy world of beasts where is no mischief.

“To France?" said the Bailie. “Yes."

The beachdair gave a whistle. “My grief! I never heard of it," said
he, confounded.

“I daresay no'; it wasna a thing to nourish in Inveraray. It wasna wi'
my will he went, I can assure ye! Nobody knew but me and Duncanson, who
sent him out his rents."

Ninian scratched his head. “Ye've knocked the feet from me!" he said in
a voice depressed. “I'm fairly wandered. And did he write ye?"

“Paul? Yes, every month."

“I'm the silliest man in the whole of Albyn!" Ninian said, disgusted,
starting to walk again. “I never guessed it."

“Ye see it was a ticklish business," said the other, tugging at the
horse. “He was among the Jacobites, and I darena breathe it here."

“I'm done! I was sure I was on the track of everything that happened
this past month, and now I'm more in the dark than ever. It's strange to
me that Æneas didna ken of this."

“He was but a child at the time."

“But your wife doesna ken either. Surely to God ye wouldna keep a thing
like that from Annabel! She thought the story of the drowning was quite
true, and so did I; ye've kept it up wi' me yourself for fourteen
years."

The Bailie groaned. “I'm just as sore," said he, “as if I had been
lashed. I havena slept much in the last three nights; ye put me in a
whirl. What has poor Paul's drowning got to do with France?"

Ninian stopped, as if he had been shot.

“When was it he was in France?" he cried.

“In the year 'sixteen. He went in Aprile and came back the following
March."

“And ye think he never was there again?"

“No, poor man!"

“That's where ye're wrong! My grief! but ye gave me the fright there,
thinking I was wandered! Your brother wasna drowned at all; he died in
France!"

“What cailleach's tale is this?"

“It's no' a cailleach's tale at all; it's the God's own truth. And you
have been the blindfold man these fourteen years that never found it
out! Drimdorran knew. He feared your nephew might discover, in the
North, and he put Lord Lovat on to him. Thank God he did! for otherwise
we might have never found the truth."

He gathered into one impetuous burst of speech, without a pause in it,
his evidence.

Beside them where they stood, and falling in a pot, a little well was
singing to the stars with which the whole arch of the night was
trembling.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE MAN FROM GUNNA.


The castle, when they passed, was mournful dark, with no light in it—at
least that could be seen. Its evening rooms looked to the courtyard;
outwardly its walls rose blank, expressionless, below the star-bright
curve of night. A breeze fanned through the ivy; stirred the laurels.
The low town, crouched beyond it, lent it height: the tower would seem
to lift gigantically. Bats were abroad; at times they gave a cheep. To
the east, on the Cowal hills, was a fleece of cloud that hid the risen
moon.

The two men and the horse were on a private way that took them through
the policy; between them and the walls was but a garden border, and they
spoke in whispers. It was as if they feared to spoil MacCailein's sleep.

“Rats at nibbling, MacCailein! Rats at nibbling!" said Ninian. “The
wonder is to me Himself can sleep, even in a turret, with so many
crannies for the rat in Scotland."

Alan-Iain-Alain Og put in his horse at the back of the land where he had
a stable; left a man to groom it, and took Ninian up the stair with him
to find a supper ready. All Annabel said to her man was, “There you
are!" and pinched his elbow. She took from him the wallets.

He pulled her ear. “Ah!" said he with a smile, “what a fine enduring
woman! Many a wife left to herself would take the chance to run. Were ye
no' feared I was lost among the mounts?"

“I feared for nothing," she answered, happy. “What always happens is the
thing one never thought of, and I took time and thought of everything
that could befall."

Æneas and Janet were already at the table; the girl had not gone home.

At another hour the spirit of a company thus gladly brought together
would be different, but over them to-night there was solemnity. The
mystery of Paul Macmaster clamoured for solution. They scarce were
seated when Ninian brought it up.

“I ask you to excuse me," Æneas interrupted. “Was I a good soldier this
month back in your command?"

Ninian beamed. “Ye couldna have been better! Ye did what ye were told,
the sodger's first concern, and held your tongue. If I was ever in a
corner I would cry for Æneas-of-the-Pistol."

Æneas flushed. “That bit of it," said he, “is neither here nor there. I
only ask assurance that I played my part as a soldier should, nor
questioned anything you did, nor pushed decisions of my own. I went with
you on sufferance; led you into trouble, and I felt the least that I
could do was to be the humble private. Now that the campaign's over, and
a new one's started closely concerning myself, I must take another
rank."

He spoke with great decision, yet without offence, and Ninian clapped
him on the shoulder.

“Well done!" he said, with heartiness. “You're a man for the brindled
hill, where each man does his own bit stalking."

“With me it stands like this," said Æneas. “I am greatly in the dark
about affairs at the period when my father disappeared. Particularly I
know little about Duncanson, and instead of working back from that
amazing story we got from Lovat, I think it better to begin at the other
end. How came my father to have anything to do with Duncanson?"

It was a somewhat lengthy history he got from Alan-Iain-Alain Og in
response to this inquiry. The Bailie went into the most minute details.
He began with a wet spring day when Æneas was unborn, when a shabby-clad
man with a canvas bag and a bundle in a napkin stepped from a
fishing-smack on Inveraray quay and asked the first one whom he met
where he might find a lodging. The man was Duncanson. He had come from
the Lowlands, where, for some years, he had followed the law in an
obscure capacity. There were Duncansons in Inveraray; they were a
Campbell sept, but long established in their own cognomen. It was
thought at first that he was a relation. But there was no connection. In
less than a week it was known in the town that his real name was
Maclean. He belonged to the Isle of Coll—or rather to an islet 'twixt
Tyree and Coll, by name of Gunna. His father had had a croft in
Grishipol in Coll, and dealt in swine. He was a man of race by all
accounts, declined in fortune—a kinsman of Lochbuie. Coll, at the
century's start, was a rebel and unruly island, though within a strong
man's hail of the Hebridean garden called Tyree, the holding of Argyll;
there was always trouble with it, and the elder Maclean, to escape a
prosecution, went over the narrow strait to Gunna and settled there,
befriended by the Duke.

If he could not change his blood, at least he could change his name, and
he aimed at a continuance of the ducal favour by taking the name of
Duncanson, his father being Duncan dubh a' Chaolais. When he died he
left a son grown up—this Alexander, who had for some years made a
living of sorts, in Tyree or Coll, indifferently, as the season suited.
He had the name of a clever lad; the family of Argyll were interested;
he was sent to a writer's place in Edinburgh, and there he had been till
he came to Inveraray.

His coming to Inveraray was a shift of ambitious policy. In Edinburgh he
was lost; there seemed no rung he could reach to in the ladder of
success, so he came to the very seat of patronage. In a day, with
MacCailein's influence, he was perched at a desk in a lawyer's office;
in a year he was indispensable to his master; in three he had bought him
out of the business. The money which bought MacGibbon out was a scanty
part of a fortune Duncanson fell heir to from a distant cousin; he was
now a man of substance, so sure of his own importance that he paid
attentions to the lady who was later to be Æneas's mother.

From his first appearance Duncanson had courted Paul Macmaster's favour,
even though Macmaster was at times suspect of politics repugnant to that
quarter of the shire. Himself, he had no politics that could not be
trimmed and twisted to pass with either side, but mostly he avoided
disputation in these matters, and with Paul the bond was one of sport.
They fished and shot together, and had a taste for fighting cocks which
came to an end when Paul took up with pigeons, to whose fancy he was led
by the other man. They spent long nights by the dovecote fire, one
winter, playing dambrod.

“Stop, stop! . . . By your leave, Sir Æneas! . . . Are ye sure it was in
the winter, Bailie?"

Ninian broke in upon a narrative whose interest sadly marred the supper.

“There's no mistake in't," said Alan-Iain-Alain Og; “I've seen the
doocot lighted up when I was coming back from curling."

“What light, now, would they have?" said Ninian, but not with a show of
much concern. “Besides the fire," he added.

“Oh, candles, of course! Or a lantern," said the Bailie. “That's not of
great importance, is it?"

“Go on!" said Ninian, buttering bread. “I only wondered. My mind will
run on candles," and history was resumed.

Paul's interest in pigeons slackened when he married, and ceased
entirely when, a twelvemonth later, his young wife died. He was,
thereafter, a homeless man, who could not bear the house of his
inheritance. His wife for a year had been its warmth; its stairs (the
doctors said) had killed her; he never set foot in it again. The infant
Æneas was sent to the care and nurture of his aunt, and his father made
the world his pillow. It was a time of great conspiracy with Jacobites;
for the first time seriously Paul became involved, and spent both time
and money on a cause too easily made attractive to his restless spirit
by the guiling tongue of an old friend, Campbell of Glendaruel, a laird
impoverished and proscript. 'Twas rarely he came home, and then but for
a flash, to see his child, and stay a night with his brother, and meet
with Duncanson to audit his accounts.

For Duncanson was now his doer—factor of his land, and always ready to
accommodate with money. Moreover, he was tenant of Drimdorran House,
with a five years' tack from Paul: he had got married. As well as Paul's
affairs he managed Islay's, and in time was Baron Bailie to the duke as
well as secretary. The son of Para-na-muic was thriving! Aware of Paul's
political engagements, he kept them secret, but in the year 'Fifteen,
when Paul was drumming up in France, the knowledge of his doings leaked
at home, and but for Islay's pity for the child, Drimdorran would have
been escheat, its owner outlawed. It was only a fate postponed. Four
years later he engaged with Glendaruel in the rash adventure checked
abruptly at Glenshiel. Drimdorran had not been forfeit to the
Crown—MacCailein had seen to that—but Duncanson, who had for years
made overtures to buy it, stepped into possession.

“I would have fought him! I would have fought him!" cried Ninian,
pushing back his chair: their meal was finished.

“That's what I aye said!" said Annabel.

Her husband shook his head. “And what were the good of that?" he asked.
“I had no standing. Neither had the boy. Sandy had his ledger and my
brother's pledge. I wasna goin' to fight a law plea for the Crown. . . .
That's the story, Æneas. Now, what do ye make of it?"

“Nothing," said Æneas. “It leaves me where I was. I thought to get some
clew that I might follow through my father's later days and——"

He stopped with a glance at Janet; her eyes were fixed on something in
her father's hands. It was the tangled hank, with the free part coiled
on stick; the beachdair wrought with it as though beside a burn.

“Good lad!" he said to Æneas. “Aye get at the start of things! And what
more clew do ye want just now than that Sandy came from Gunna, and a
Maclean at that? I never knew't before. Theid dùthchas an aghaidh nan
creag—the family blood of a man goes down to the very rock! I ken
Gunna; I was one time yonder, there! The solan builds in Gunna, and the
solan is a bird that gets his fish just where he can; it makes no
difference to him, the herring or the saithe."

He rose and walked the floor with short steps, eager.

“Stop you, Æneas! Although ye're in command, I'm no' so good a sodger as
yoursel', and must get talking. A man brought up in Gunna between a
loyal isle and Coll is like the gannet,—he will take his toll of fish
from both. I know the springs of Sandy now—they're envy and ambeetion.
Since ever he stood in your father's house a tenant, and looked out upon
the fields, he meant to be their laird. He got his wish. What way? By
God's goodwill, or accident? Na, na! God has no particular fancy for the
clan Maclean no more nor me, and it wasna accident. He got it, first and
last, wi' his own endeavour! Your father—God be wi' him!—was the
brawest pigeon Sandy ever flew, and then he plucked him. The thing's as
clear as day! 'Twas he that blabbed in the year 'Fifteen; the man was in
a hurry to sit down, and seeing your father wouldna sell, he must
himself be sold. Sandy is like the ptarmigan or weasel, beasts that take
the colour of the season; ye may be sure he wasna Whig in private wi'
your father, whatever he might be before the duke, and he would egg your
father on. He would lend him all the money that he wanted, and never
give a cheep till your father was so deep in treason there was no
escape. His chance came in the silly splutter of the clans that ended at
Glenshiel. Sandy, as MacCailein's man, was bound to know the Government
was going to crush that rising like an egg, but he wouldna warn your
father. Na, na! Drimdorran he would have! And Glenshiel served his turn,
though your father didna perish there; he was good as dead, and could
never show his face again in Scotland."

Æneas was aflame. “I think you're right," said he. “It seems a very
reasonable assumption of how things were standing. Duncanson was the
only man in all Argyll who knew my father was yet alive, and he smuggled
him off to France. Then he proclaimed and proved himself the owner of
Drimdorran before the estate could be forfeit to the Crown, and he kept
him there."

“Just what I was thinking to myself."

“It defies the face of clay to think how any man could be so wicked!"
Annabel cried out.

Throughout was Janet silent, listening. In her mien was some dissent or
hesitation.

“What troubles me is this," said the Bailie; “Paul was my
brother-germain. We were the best of friends, although I quarrelled with
him on the head of Glendaruel, and all that rebel carry-on. His son was
in our dwelling. I can not think that Paul, if he was for a whole year
hid in France, would not have sent some word to me."

“I'll warrant ye he sent ye word!" said Ninian.

“I never got it,—not a scrape!"

“Of course ye didna! Sandy would see to that. It was through him he
would send you letters; and Sandy, when it comes to letters, has a tarry
hand, as Jennet there kens to her cost."

“That, too," said Æneas, “is a very likely thing. He was done with us,
and had his own skin to consider. It would never do to have it come out
he was in league to hide the man whom himself, as Baron Bailie, had
proclaimed."

They stood on the floor, the men, and reasoned hotly.

“Mercy me!" cried Annabel, “can you men no' sit down and come to the bit
that pierces me—what happened to poor Paul?"

Her husband clapped her shoulder. “Patience, a ghalaid, patience!"

“Is he dead at all? We have no proofs of it."

“But think of it, Annabel! . . . fourteen years . . . and a son of his
loins with us. And he was Paul. He couldna keep the silence of the tomb
for fourteen years!"

“But he might have been imprisoned. He might, like Æneas, have been
trepanned on board a ship. Do ye no' think that is likely, Ninian?"

“Anything on earth is likely, me'm, when a bad man mounts the saddle.
Your brother may be slaving in the cane."

Janet touched his arm. She had sat with a pale face, looking at him.
“No," she said in a curious low voice to him. “He is not there. . . . He
is dead. . . . He was killed . . . Duncanson."

They stared at her.

“How ken ye that?" her father asked, astonished.

“You think so! I know you do! And it would be cruel wrong to build false
hopes."

“I've never said a word to make you think so——"

“No. It is in your air."

He made a grimace. “The young bird kens the father's chirp! It's quite
true, Alan; your brother's dead, and Duncanson destroyed him. I don't
know when. I don't know where. I don't know how. But he brought about
his end! I wasna goin' to say that till I saw his grave. My hank is
still much fankled. He had him killed. There's not a doubt. I've kent it
for the last two hours."

“How?" said Æneas.

The beachdair gave a flicker with his hands and pouted. “I've smelled
it! I'm like the fisher who can smell the herring shoal at sea. A
hundred things cry out that Sandy's guilty. They have been pouring on me
since we left the North, but to-night the most of all. Æneas, lad, I've
seen your foe! Yonder he was in a lowe of candles, and I made him
squeal. He thought he had you settled like your father, and I kept him
in that notion till I saw my chance. When I told him at the last that ye
were here, and that ye knew the story of the drowning was a lie, I
pricked his liver. I got no more from him, but——"

On the porch of the house was a tirling-pin, which Annabel preferred to
knockers. Ninian's speech was stopped when it gave a harshly grating
rasp.

“The lassie's out," said Annabel, starting up.

“I'll answer the door," said Æneas, and left the room.

He came back at once with an air of agitation. “Duncanson," he said,
“has sent for me. I'll go."




CHAPTER XXXII.

CONFESSIONS.


An hour and a half later Æneas came through Drimdorran garden, his hat
in his hand, and his coat thrown open to the wind of night, for he was
melting from the heat of an outrageous fire in a room where airlessness
and his own commotion suffocated. So rapt was he in agitating thoughts
he saw at first the dovecote lit, and even stared at it, without his
mind's attention. He had almost passed the path that led to it, when its
light went out, and thus gave a jolt to his curiosity. The tower had
played so strange a part in the revelations lately made and now so
baffling, that he was seized with a desire to find out who was in it at
so odd an hour, and for a moment he was half inclined to think it might
be a repentant girl.

He went through the thicket on his tip-toes, and just as he had reached
its heart he heard the door pushed softly shut. For a little he stood
hesitant, and then had a queer illusion. It was that all this past
month's happenings were a dream; that he had fallen asleep while seeking
for his pupils, and that Margaret was behind the door with the
lantern-candle smouldering. In the grip of this strange fancy forth he
went, and pushing the door ajar, slid in. Again he fumbled in his coat
and struck a light. The first sparks showed him Ninian! He almost cried
out loud to see that face where should be Margaret's.

“What in fortune's name are you doing here?" he asked, and Ninian made
no reply but lit the lantern.

“What notion brought ye here?" he said when the wick had caught. “How
kent ye it was open?"

Æneas did as he had done with Margaret when she had asked that question;
he pointed to the window.

“My grief!" said Ninian, “I meant to sort that," and he hurriedly
stuffed sacks into the opening. “What said the old man to ye? Did ye see
him?"

“So much as is left of him," said Æneas, with a catch in his voice. “The
man is shattered so greatly I was wae to look at him." He wiped his brow
and stared about him vacantly. “I felt in front of him my strength, my
youth, my anger, and my hopes a sort of crime. Oh, Ninian! Ninian! what
breast of man who likes his fellows could withstand a sight like yon?
Can any pang be sorer to our manhood than to see a creature, made like
us, with every spark of what ennobles us and makes us other than the
brutes, stamped out of him? Everything gone! Health, cool reason,
self-respect, and nothing left but a cringing bag of bones and shameful
terrors. . . . It humbles, Ninian! It is an affront to the race. I would
take the poor wretch, broken, in below a nook of plaid and hide him from
the trees and flowers, for they would grue at him. I declare to God I
share his scathe and shame; they're mine, too; they're all mankind's.
You and I have seen him; for pity's sake and for our human pride can we
not conceal him?"

He was wrought up to a feeling that was painful even to witness; his
lips were quivering. Nothing in the dovecote caught his eye—the
scattered grain nor Ninian's stern demeanour that changed at the close
of that impetuous burst to a look that had some hue of tenderness.

“Are ye sorry for him?" asked the other.

“I ache to the very soul with pity for myself and him!"

Ninian puckered up his face. “I can peety, too," said he, “and just as
keen as you. I never like to see a broken man: it might be, with a twist
of chance, mysel'; for we are like the fir-trees, some will grow up
straight and others crooked, and the woodman kens not why. Oh yes, I can
peety, too, but I can peety most the man that's wronged, and better than
peety in a man is justice. Peety and justice should be like a body's
lugs—aye close enough together and both listening, but they never
meet. . . . What lies was he telling ye?"

Æneas sat on the bin. “It was just what we thought," he said. “Craft,
greed, spite, and cowardice. He has confessed it aft, and though he has
wronged me cruelly, I have hardly a spark of anger left for him."

“If I was you," said Ninian drily, “I would not let out the light of
anger altogether; I would keep a wee bit griosach for the morning just
in case."

“He admits he urged my father off to France, and was in correspondence
with him for a year, and that deliberately he kept my uncle ignorant of
the truth."

“What for? What for?" cried Ninian. “I'm sure he's quirking ye!"

“No. The thing is quite patent. He was in mortal terror to do anything
fourteen years ago that should expose his own connivance in my father's
hiding. Then, again, he feared that any dispute might arise as to the
validity of his possession of Drimdorran. You see he had himself at
first believed the rumour of my father's drowning, and before he learned
the truth from Lovat, he had claimed the property and quarrelled with my
uncle. His greed to keep it when he learned my father still was living
prompted him to clear him out the country and hush the whole affair, for
he felt that only my father's death could justify a closure on the
estate. My uncle couldn't clear the debt, he knew——"

“Stop!" said Ninian, sniffing. “Do ye smell soot?"

“No," said Æneas with surprise and some impatience.

“I could swear I do," said Ninian. “Never mind! Go on wi' Sandy's lies."

“Do you doubt him, Mr Campbell?"

“Yes, I doubt him, Mr Macmaster! I would doubt him if it was his
deathbed and I was his priest. Ye're far too good and simple, Æneas, for
a man like yon. What way did your father die, and where?"

“I am coming to that. Duncanson, part from spite at my uncle, as he now
admits, but mostly, as he says with abject shame, to stick to what he
had prematurely grabbed, never divulged that he was keeping my father
abroad, supplied with Drimdorran rents. And just as we suspected, he
destroyed my father's letters to my uncle and to me."

Ninian started. “Let me think!" said he, and held his chin. “Well, well!
What else?" he said in a little, with a steely glitter in his eyes.

“My father lived a shiftless life in France——" A cloud came over
Æneas's manner. “He went about from place to place without a settlement.
All Duncanson's letters to him were addressed to the care of a Scot,
Macfarlane, with a shop in Havre; and the thing came to an end with a
letter from Macfarlane sending back the last of Duncanson's. My father
died in Paris——"

“Who saw him die?" shot Ninian.

Æneas wrung his hands, with his visage furrowed. “That is the bitter
thing!" he said. “That is——that is what revolts me! I have only the
old man's word for it, but he says my father at the last—— . . . He
changed his politics. . . . He mixed among the Jacobites, and sent their
plans——"

“A spy!" cried Ninian, and spat. “A turncoat spy! Oh-h-h, isn't that the
damned rogue!"

“My father, sir?" said Æneas, whitening.

“No, no, no, no! Ye silly boy! But Duncanson! I knew your father little,
Æneas, but I knew his stamp and know his kin. There never was a traitor
named Macmaster! There, sure enough is Sandy lying. Blow on your
griosach now, and have a fire; ye never can wrestle wi' a rogue until
ye hate him."

“You hearten me!" cried Æneas. “I doubted it! I doubted it! Oh, Ninian,
if you could understand what it means to me to have my father's memory
clean! It was the last that was left to me of that romance that made the
Highlands cry in me like trumpets. And what have I seen?—the ruffian
chiefs with their men for instruments, their cunning and their crimes; a
land held under bondage to mere names! More poetry is in the life of the
poorest fisher on Loch Fyne! But I couldna think my father such a man,
nor moved by the springs that actuate such men as Lovat. He must have
had some gleam, some vision worth the dying for; 'twas that that sent me
North. I went a prince, in a mood of glory, and I came back a beggar,
for I saw nothing there I would lift my hat to. There was only left for
me the hope that there might, one time, have really been a cause that
justified my father's ruin. His story was the only scrap left to me of
my old romantics, and the sorest blow I have had in my life was this
tale of Duncanson's. He says my father was suspected by his friends and
challenged; that he died in the encounter twelve months after he left
Scotland, and no one knows now where he lies."

“The lying's up in the big house with the candles in't," said Ninian
hotly. “Where's Macfarlane?"

“He's dead, according to Duncanson. He died ten years ago."

“And where's the letters of your father and Macfarlane?"

“That I asked, of course. But they're no longer in existence. Duncanson
had kept them in his desk till the day he fancied I had searched it, and
then in terror of exposure he destroyed them all."

“My grief! isn't he the master-hand? Ye're in grips wi' the cleverest
scamp in Scotland!"

He took off a shoe and shook the grains from it; the mildewed corn was
to his ankles. Æneas for the first time saw with surprise the signs of
questing.

“What were you doing here?" asked he.

“Seeking. Just seeking what's no in't that I can see—the cause of
Sandy's terrors. When you were gone from your uncle's house I took
Jennet home and came up the glen to meet you. It wasna altogether to
meet you either, but to glisk again through this place. I was here
to-night before and put it to the probe like any gauger—Can ye tell me
this? Did Sandy leave the house this evening?"

“He did," said Æneas. “He was found in the park two hours ago with
neither hat nor cloak on by the Muileach, who missed him, and was sure
he was in the river."

“That's just what I was thinking! It wasna the river he was for at all,
but here. I left the door shut close wi' a stone at the foot to latch
it, and when I came back just now the stone was gone and the door was
locked. It didna fash me much to burst it in, for I had loosed the
staple. I'm feared he's got the better of me, Æneas; he was here for
something that I failed to see. I thought I had searched in everything,
but no!—there was something I overlooked, and Duncanson has got it."

He grimaced with vexation.

“Of what nature?" queried Æneas.

“That's just what I canna tell ye! But this I'll stake my soul on—the
end of my hank was here! It's no' in the desk at all! It was something
in the doocot. In the talk I had wi' Duncanson I got that quite plain.
Man, I played him like a fish! . . . Did you say oucht about his
trappin' ye in Inverness?"

Æneas flushed. “Upon my soul," said he, “I couldna."

“What way?"

“It seemed a trivial thing in the light of what he said about my father.
And then—and then he looked so wretched! With a load of such disgrace
on him, I felt to add another roguery to his charge."

Ninian shrugged. “Ye beat all!" said he. “But it doesna matter. He ran
off from me wi' his hands on his lugs before I got that length. But I
got this from him—there was nothing in his desk that night he needed to
bother about beyond the doocot key. His whole concern—what put him
bedfast on his back—was this, that you were in the doocot. Now what was
here that he should be afraid ye might find out?"

Once more Æneas reddened. “You said yourself it might well distress him
to think his girl was here."

“I did!" said Ninian. “But I ken better now. He never thought for a
moment she was here until I told him so, mysel', this very evening. It
was no consideration for his girl that vexed him; it was you being in
the doocot, and he thought that ye were searching. If he had not
something o' the most dangerous character hidden here, what for should
he be troubled at your looking? Tell me that, 'ille!"

“You have found nothing?"

“Not one iota! It was here, I'll swear, when I came first, and now it's
gone. I've ransacked over again; there's nothing here now but trash and
useless papers."

“What sort of papers?" asked Æneas.

“Oh, just the kind that a man of the law would have—the kind that show
men trust each other even less in the days of written sheepskins than
they did when they held by swords. I'll warrant ye I looked them, for
I'm sure it must be papers Sandy's hiding. It might have been the very
letters from your father or Macfarlane! . . . But no!" he added quickly.
“There never was Macfarlane! The mind that made your father out a spy
made up Macfarlane."

He took up the haft of a pick and beat on the dovecote wall. “Cry out!"
said he. “Cry out! Oh, Æneas! if lime had not the heart burned out of
it, this place would tell me what I'm wanting. It kens what troubles
Duncanson! There's no' a hole in this house he hasna boarded up to keep
birds out. It was done when he got the property; the wood looks fresh as
yesterday's but tastes of years of weather. What for did he take this
trouble? Ninian can tell ye that! Wherever birds are breeding will come
folk, and he was not for folk about his doocot. There was here the
proof—and not in the desk—that he had plucked your father; ay, and
worse! By mankind unbeheld your father died, and that grey rogue is the
worst who was ever whelped, who sent Prim Campbell to her cell! But I'm
no done wi' him yet; come you away down home, my hero, and we'll see
your uncle Alan."

Without another word he blew the lantern out, and this time did not even
trouble with the door, but left it swinging open.

But on the threshold he sniffed again, and asked again if Æneas smelled
soot. “Ye don't?" he said with disappointment. “I could swear I do, and
maybe it's the lantern."




CHAPTER XXXIII.

NIGHT-WANDERING.


Late going home that night, and very late, from Bailie Alan's, Ninian,
in the empty street, could not but wonder at the fair face put on life
and the aspect of the world by sleep. Here, surely, dwelt the innocent,
unconscious: hearts at ease, untroubled heads on feather pillows. The
high lands towered on either hand of him, all packed with slumberers,
drifting, though they did not know it, like the clouds. Dark windows
broke the walls of the lime-washed tenements; the cobbles of the gaping
closes might have never known a footstep. Prevailed a smell of peat on
fires smothered for the morning. Dead leaves from garden trees, and from
the policy, were blown about the causeway; they pattered on before him,
crisp, like little living things. Behind him on the walls high tide was
beating, and the river made that noise which never changed in it from
year to year—so mournful always in the night-time, even with the
memories of its pools of fish, so like the voice of time made audible.

His footsteps echoed through the burgh, startling himself a little, like
the footsteps of a man whom he had passed deep in the forest
hunting-path in small dark hours of morning, once, when searching for a
dog astray. The man had stepped out from the dust below the fir-trees
suddenly, and come to him, and passed without an answer to his
salutation, pacing slow, and melting into shade again, incredible but
for his footsteps. That strange night-wanderer in the woods was Ninian's
greatest mystery. It was one he never was to solve. To-night his own
re-echoed steps brought up that old experience for a moment; then he
heard an infant's cry in some high attic chamber—peevish, as it were
with anger that it should be born. Its mother hushed it; he could hear
her plainly coax it to its sleep, and sing to it a drowsy strain of
“Colin's Cattle." Its whimpering done, the burgh slept again.

Fresh from a long sederunt at the Bailie's, he had a feeling in himself
as of a person walking on a crag far up in mountains, looking down
through openings in mist at things deplorable, revealed in
glimpses—harrying beasts, sin writhing in the depths, iniquitous
concerns, greed, pillage, cunning, murderous doings. It seemed amazing
folk should sleep at all,—MacCailein's castle or the poorest hovel of
the lanes, when the spirit of unrest and evil stalked abroad.

And yet the night, for all its lifelessness, had some wild spirit of its
own, in flying clouds that swept across the moon like reek. He wondered.
The tide beat on the walls and the river roared; the wind, as it were,
blew where it wist, untrammelled; these indifferent to results, though
subject to some law outwith themselves. Was it so with men? That they
were driven, too, by a force beyond themselves, to make from sin and
goodness at the last, far hence, some strong and perfect life, as the
life of the ceilidh stories?

He felt the weariness of the past week's doings mount on him; he was a
little dazed, his mind in a half delirium.

And then of a sudden was he wide awake, with the beachdair of him
uppermost!

The way to his house was past the Fisherland. It was a tenement of
substantial build, with half a dozen families at its southern end where
it looked on fields; but at its north with one house untenanted since
Whitsunday, when the owner, Campbell of Craignure, took for the summer
to his country-seat. The shadow of the church obscured three-fourths of
it, but a corner stood blank-white in the light of moon that at the
moment fought its way through wrack.

A man was standing on the steps and fumbling at its door, with curious
faint imploring cries as if he might be weeping.

At first it was Ninian's notion that some fool debauched mistook the
dwelling for his own, and he went forward to explain that this was a
house for the time deserted. How great was his amaze to find it
Duncanson!

He had on him a greatcoat and a plaid about his shoulders, but his head
was bare, and his haffits blowing in the wind disclosed him even before
his voice.

A homeless cat was at his ankles, rubbing against his hose; his breast
was against the door, and his hands wrought at the upper panels as if to
push them in. And he was craving piteously for entrance. He spoke as in
a dream; the name of his wife, dead years ago, was uppermost:
“Ealasaid!" cried he, “oh, Ealasaid, let me in!" And then in Gaelic said
the night was cold and folk were after him. The street was saddened by
his cries.

Even when Ninian came to him and touched him, he still leaned up against
the door, and craved, disconsolate, paying no attention.

“A chiall!" said Ninian, “what is wrong? There is no one in that
house, nor light nor ember, Mr Duncanson."

And thereupon the old man turned. The moon struck on his face that was
like dry cheese cracked; his eyes were standing in his head.

“It is my house," he said in a wandered way, and looked up at the arch,
where a date was cut on the keystone.

It had indeed been his, in the lighter days, the house where he brought
his wife, and his daughter had been born; his care-free days, if ever he
had any, had been there.

“No more your house, sir," Ninian said to him. “Ye mind, Drimdorran?
Craignure has got this place. There is no one there. It will not be
opened up till Christmas."

It was then Drimdorran knew him.

“Tha airgiod ann!—There's money in't!" said he, with come crazy
memory of what earlier in the night he had been speaking of to Ninian,
and then as if he wakened from a walking sleep, gave a gasp and shuffled
down the steps. He looked up at the house front strangely, then scuffled
hurriedly along the street, as if for home.

The wind blew out his plaid; he walked on the crown of the causeway,
bent down at the shoulders, dead leaves blown about his feet, and he
made no sound, for he wore, not shoes, but slippers. In the dreary
street the figure seemed not wholly human—rather a phantom of the mind,
an image conjured out of desolation, some symbol of the end of all
things,—passion and will, contrivance, cleverness and self-assurance
humbled at the last to a slinking ghost going down a high ravine to
giddy space where the lasting winds and the clouds had mastery.

Ninian stood watching. There warred in him contending feelings of
dislike and pity, utter weariness and curiosity. He guessed at what had
brought the old man forth to cry at the door in Fisherland—he sought
for peace. It was himself he sought for—an earlier self and
unrecoverable, a happier self and better, for whom the ticking clock had
no loud warnings. He was not, Ninian thought, entirely mad, but in a
fever, thrown back as a man may be in dreams to less-disordered periods
of his life.

There were less than a hundred yards to Ninian's house; it was only
round the corner; every bone of him was aching for the bed, but
Duncanson's appearance in this curious fashion stirred reserves of
energy, and in a little while he followed him, and cut through a lane
that brought him out ahead of him beside the river.

He left the road and walked the grass, invisible to Duncanson, who
padded on till he reached the bridge and crossed to the side his house
was on. For a moment Ninian swithered, then made up his mind that his
way should be otherwise—on the south side of the river, whence, as
well, he could command the other's movements with less risk of being
seen. Not quite abreast, for the beachdair hung behind, they went up
the glen where Drimdorran House was lighted bright as ever, and the
closer he came to it the more apparent it became to Ninian that he had
made an error.

Duncanson was not going home directly; he was going to the dovecote! He
went through the thicket, and across the river Ninian heard the hinges
creak.

How stupid he had been to place between himself and this chance of some
great discovery, the pools of Aray at their deepest!

But he lost no time in seeking to amend his blunder; like a deer he ran
back through the grass till he reached a ford, and splashing over the
shoes on stepping-stones, he crossed, and along the other bank to reach
the tower.

He was too late! The door was being locked by Duncanson, whom, from the
cover of a bush, he watched pass through the thicket, then make off
across the field in the direction of his house.

It was none of Ninian's concern to attend him further; he had come so
far, in truth, from an apprehension that the man might be in flight from
perils closing round him, and now that Duncanson was home he felt at
liberty to go home himself.

But first he sought the dovecote. For the third time he forced an
entrance. This time he blinded up the windows with the sacks before he
lit the lantern, still warm from the use of Duncanson. Again he put the
building to the closest search, to find that nothing was disturbed since
last he was there. But its owner must have seen the evidence of former
searching; the corn piled on the floor, the papers strewn carelessly
upstairs had a meaning unmistakable, as Ninian had intended that they
should.

When his scrutiny was over this time, he did a curious thing; he opened
up the seed-bin and jumped in, and drew the lid down on him for a
minute. That done he climbed out again, went up to the second storey,
and clapped down upon the floor and wrought for twenty minutes at the
planking with his knife. When he was done the candle of the lantern
flickered out; its end was come; its final grease was spilt upon his
boots.

In half an hour he was in his bed at home and sleeping like a boy.

*        *        *        *        *

The land was bathed in yellow light, and the forenoon well advanced when
he got up next day and took his breakfast. Janet had had hers long hours
ago; her rest had freshened her, but yet in her manner were uneasiness
and restraint. From him to her there was conveyed some influence
bodiless and secret—hints and premonstrations in his flattest tones,
the twitching of his eyebrows, even in the breathing of his nostrils.
His air affected her peculiarly.

“You were late of getting in this morning," she said to him.

“I was that!" he admitted. “It's no' a bite o' the night that'll do for
me; I like to make a banquet o't."

“I know where you were," said Janet. “You were in the doocot."

He put down his spoon, laid his two hands flat on the table and looked
at her.

“My grief!" said he, “ye're no' canny! How kent ye that?"

“Your shoes were covered with candle-grease," she answered, “and you
weren't in any dwelling-house till that time of the morning. Besides,
there was grain in them."

“Oh yes!" said he sharply, “that, so far as it goes, is pretty clever of
you; but what for should ye think it was the doocot, Jennet? I never was
in the place in all my life—till last night."

“I knew," she answered simply.

“There's many another place in the parish where one might come on
candle-creash and wade in corn. What made ye guess the doocot?"

She got very red, but this time gave no answer.

“Ye have a way of getting sometimes at the core of things while I am
creeping round the outskirts. . . . Do ye ken anything of this affair?"

And then she paled again. “Nothing," she said, and he looked at her with
unbelieving.

“This is a strange business," he said, “and of a deep concern to Æneas
Macmaster. He has for fourteen years been cheated of his rights. He
should have Drimdorran; it is his! The Duke has only to hear our story
of it to put that all right—at least a little more would do it if I had
just the proofs."

“That's just it!" she cried. “And I know nothing, nothing, nothing!" and
thereupon she dashed out of the room.

His own affairs for a week had been absent from his mind; this riddle of
Paul Macmaster's fate made the scheme he was sent to frustrate by
inquiries in the North of trivial account, but now that he was back he
must report. In these affairs he was immediately under orders, and Islay
was from home, but the Duke's concern in the beachdair business ever
was as close as Islay's, and Ninian made up his mind the report should
be for him directly. For hours he wrote at it—a dreary task at any
time, but the drearier since his zest was no longer in the business. The
name of Duncanson was never mentioned, nor a hint conveyed of any
difficulties; it might have been a pleasant ramble he had taken to the
North.

When he was done he read it through to Janet.

“You say nothing of Prim?" said she, surprised. “Nor the part of
Duncanson in her condition?"

He shook his head.

“Na. I'll leave that to another hand. He'll learn of that from Forbes in
time enough, if he hasna learned already, and then he'll ask me——"

“But Lady Grange——"

“That's likewise Duncan's business, lass. I'll wager he has nudged the
Justice-Clerk already. I never in my life gave out a summons though I'm
Messenger-at-Arms, but I would like to have the chance to cleave a stick
outside the walls of Castle Dounie and fasten a citation in't for Simon
Fraser."

He sent a messenger with his report up to the castle, and spent—a thing
unusual for him—the rest of the day about the house, with a snatch of
sleep which he explained to Janet by a warning that he might be out all
night.

It was late in the afternoon when he sallied forth, and bought in a shop
a candle, though he might have had a score from Janet. He bought it from
a man who years before had been a carpenter, the one man of his trade at
that time in the burgh, and having pouched his purchase, sat on a
herring firkin half an hour and talked with the wright who now sold
candles. It seemed even to the chandler a singular waste of time.

In another shop he bought two barley scones and a little wedge of
cheese, but there he did not gossip. So drolly furnished he was making
for the quay when he saw a horse with a boy bare-back on it going down
the beach among the shingle. He knew every horse in the parish, and this
one was a stranger, a dark bay, cutach-tailed, with the rime of travel
on its flanks. The boy rode out into the water, splashed about a while
to cool the horse, and then came in.

Ninian caught the halter.

“Who's is the beast, my son?" said he, and the boy said it was from the
castle stables, newly come with a man from Inverness.

On this went the beachdair home, and shaved himself and put on his
Sabbath clothes. “It's a man from Forbes," he said to his daughter.
“Duncan's stirring! Before an hour ye'll see me sent for by MacCailein."

And he was right; the summons came for him.

He tucked a bundle of papers under his arm, portentous, to his girl's
amusement: it was his vanity to seem the business man, and the papers
had served this purpose often; they were dog-eared farm-stock
inventories, quite irrelevant to his commission. “They're like the
pipes," he said to her. “A man wi' pipes in his oxter's always bold, and
wi' me it's the same wi' papers."

He went to the castle with a fancy that it would be in an uproar over
Forbes's tidings from the North, and he found it like a church. The
great room he was put in, with its shelves of books, and pictures, iron
suits, and banners, had the hush of a necropolis. The only sound in it
was when a cinder fell upon the hearthstone. A drum was hanging on the
wall beside a window with a silk band round it marked with the names of
Ramillies and Malplaquet; he knew it had drummed MacCailein up on battle
mornings, and he itched to tap it with his fingers. Far off in the house
a door was shut and another opened; some one played a flute. A curtain
parted, and the Duke came in.

“Well, Ninian Campbell," he said, “I thought before this to hear you
barking."

For a moment the beachdair hung on the meaning of this speech, and
then he smiled.

“I never bark, your Grace," said he, “till I have the beast at bay."

“Come away in here till I speak to you," said MacCailein, backing
between the curtains.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONTENTS OF A BARREL.


Æneas spent that day in poring, till his eyes were aching, over letters,
ledgers, vouchers, fetched out by his uncle from a barrel in the attic
where they had lain in the strings that bound them for fourteen years.
The mouse had nibbled at them, and the worm; they were thick with dust.
They were all that was left of poor Paul Macmaster, of a life once warm
and busy, ardent with zeals and animate with youthful passions; wise
often; generous always; sometimes—as it must be with us all—a little
foolish. Spread out on a clean cloth on the table, musty-smelling,
mildewed and yellow, dead things in a world still briskly going on, they
solemnised the parlour as a coffin would have done, so that Annabel must
feel like weeping, and take her sewing elsewhere.

She could never bear to see them at any time. When Duncanson had sent
the barrel home on the death of Paul and the rupture with her husband,
she had gathered the unhappiest of the dead man's letters to them—those
of his restless years and spendthrift politics, mad schemes and baffled
hopes; she had gathered them altogether with the records of factorage
and usury from Duncanson, put a sheet on the top of them all as if it
were a shroud, and buried them under lumber in the attic. Of all that
was in her house, they were the only things not brought out to the green
to air in spring.

The Bailie had brought them forth at Æneas's suggestion. He had,
himself, repugnance to them. Though he had vehemently claimed his
brother's papers when Drimdorran passed to the business man in
Fisherland, he had scarcely glanced at them when they were come,
delivered one day from a cart for the quay with peats, and like his
wife, was vexed to see them now.

“There ye are!" he said to Æneas, as he tossed the barrel over. “Well
may Sandy say, 'Let them be clocking, I have the eggs!'"

He helped to place the papers in some order on the table, wiped the dust
from his hands, and left the young man to their study.

It was the first time Æneas had seen them since, a boy, he had kept a
jackdaw in the attic, and then he had no idea what they were. He saw
them now as documents most tragic; not only his father's past in them,
but himself (a curious kind of little brother, strange and dead), for
every letter to his uncle had some message for the boy, and he could
recollect some words of them. They had come from the oddest
quarters—inns and monasteries, vessels and casernes; from streets in
Leith and Yarmouth; from the isles of Barra and Benbecula; London,
Avignon, and Calais; three different houses in the Rue de Richelieu.
They guardedly preserved a reticence about the purpose of the writer's
shifts from place to place, but Æneas could read between the lines, as
doubtless Alan and his wife were meant to do. There breathed in them at
times a spirit of elation, oftener despondency. Money had been spilt
like water; half the letters groaned at the want of cash.

From the bold and running hand-write of his father, so curiously like
his own, as if penmanship were in heredity, Æneas turned, less eager, to
the books and papers filled with the scrawling script of Duncanson. The
papers were out of sequence, loosely thrown together regardless of their
nature or their dates; no letters, but accounts, receipts, and balances,
the records of Black Sandy's intromissions with the estate and with its
owner. The main book was a ledger, parchment-bound, soiled, and
dog-eared as the inventories of Ninian Campbell; it was from it that
Æneas could gather easiest the nature of his father's dealings with his
factor. A debit, always mounting, stood for years. The rents, such as
they were, were rising; but so, it seemed, were the costs of the
improvements on the property, and every now and then came in a loan from
Duncanson—“to Paris," “to the care of Glendaruel," “to self at
Martinmas." On some occasions these had been paid back with interest,
after a few months' interval, but otherwise the loans were a constant
burden.

Æneas was left for hours at this doleful business. His uncle had a
gabbert at the quay with salt, and was at the cooperage, no more
preoccupied with what he did there than with poetry; a fury was on him
at the mad deception Duncanson had so long maintained, but most of all
at this shocking latest accusation against Paul. The worst of it was, he
had nothing to confute it! No, that was not the worst!—the worst was
that the story might have just a grain of truth in it. It was ill to
think of Paul—the loyal, even in folly—so much as turning a sleeve to
betray his friends. And yet there were stories of such apostates in his
cause—of men who kept up a connection with its victims, selling their
plans for safety to themselves, or even for money. Could Paul, in some
desperate hour, have played the spy? But it was incredible! His
innocence of that the Duke could speak to: Alan would see the Duke and
get the truth to-morrow. But the story spoiled his peace of mind to-day.

At gloaming, Annabel, with her parlour made untenable for her by reason
of this resurrection of what she had thought was buried for good and
all, left Æneas at his task with a glass of milk beside him, and went
round to Janet Campbell's. For Annabel the story of the spying was a
trifle, if the men spied on were rogues, as she honestly thought all
Jacobites save Paul Macmaster; but she felt it hurt her indirectly
through the anguish which it brought her nephew. For her it was more to
the point that the father had in some way died—if he were dead at
all—in secrecy, with fearful possibilities which left all speculation
on his fate a nightmare. She had little faith in the ability of Alan or
of Æneas to clear the mystery; what trust she had was all in Ninian
Campbell, and her call on Janet was, in truth, a call upon the
beachdair.

She was a long time gone; so long that her husband went to look for her,
and he met her on the street. She was someway roused, a nervousness was
in her manner. “There's nothing fresh?" he asked her, wondering.

“No," she said, “but there's a thing that bothers me. It's Jennet
Campbell. I canna get over her!"

She walked some yards in silence by his side, as they turned for home.

“Well?" said her husband. “What ails Jennet? She's none the worse, I
hope, o' her jauntings? I thought, myself, last night, she was out of
trim."

“Deplorably! And she's worse to-day. I thought it was right to call and
ask for her, and learn perhaps what Ninian was doing. I kent he wouldna
be losing time at packin' salt or rummaging in barrels."

“Just that, my dear!" said the Bailie. “Ye're in trim, yourself,
whatever! And what's the news of Ninian?"

“He's out. He's away for the night wi' a penny candle in his pocket. She
watched him leave Carmichael's shop and made an excuse to go there
herself and find what he was buying."

Her man heaved up his shoulders. “It's no' wi' a candle Ninian need
search," said he. “If it's Paul's concerns he's prying in, he'll need a
bonfire. Where was he goin'?"

“It was there that Jennet puzzled me first, for she kens; I'm sure she
kens, but she'll no' let on. Alan! there's something at the back of that
girl's mind. She's frightened!"

“What for?"

“I canna tell ye that! But as sure as I'm a livin' woman. Jennet
Campbell's frightened about something. It's in her eyes! I ken that girl
as if she were my daughter; till yesterday her heart was bare to me; she
knows I'm friendly to her about Æneas, but for some reason that I canna
fathom she's dubious of Æneas, and something's in her knowledge she's
afraid that I'll find out!"

“Hoots!" said the Bailie, “it's all in your imagination!"

“Na, na!" said Annabel firmly. “Allow a woman! That girl would break her
legs for him, and he's just as daft for her; if it wasna that she kens
he is, and that I'm friendly, I might think that she was frightened she
might lose him."

“But what were ye talkin' about to find this out?" her husband asked
her.

“Petticoats! Just petticoats! What widths of bombazeen, and all about
tucks and gathers—the lassie's daft! To think she could baffle me wi'
her petticoats, and her cheek like ash and her face begrutten! Anything
at all but talk of Æneas and his father's business! There's something
curious in it, Alan!——"

She had got so far when something stopped her—an eager whisper. They
had reached their house-front; Æneas lay out on the sill of an open
window.

“I thought you would never come!" said he. “I have something curious to
show you."

When they got in, he was still in the midst of papers. The milk she had
left for him when she went out remained untasted. He had the ledger in
his hands, with the back torn off for half its length, and a
reading-glass that was sometimes used by his uncle lay on the table.

“Did you ever go through this book?" he asked his uncle.

His uncle stammered. “Well, in a way, I looked at it," he said with some
confusion.

“Ye never did," cried Annabel. “Ye just sat over it and grat! That was
the way I took the whole trash from ye and shoved it in the garret."

“Indeed I canna just exactly say I studied it," her man confessed. “It
had, at the time, too much in it for me. I always meant to take
another——"

Æneas clapped it on the table. “It's a blackguard fabrication full of
lies!" he cried. “If you had looked it properly you could have found
enough to hang Black Sandy! It's falsified! It's scraped, and cut, and
built anew to make my father bankrupt!"

He showed them the book's defects. It was only a languid impulse that
had made him add some columns up, and in one he had found that a single
cipher of miscalculation lost a hundred pounds to his father's credit.
With this as a hint he went through the ledger from end to end, and
summed up every page of it. He found at least a dozen such
miscalculations, all in the factor's favour, and all involving sums
substantial. They were all in the yearly balances. But that was not the
whole! The wrong summations were not the result of accident; in every
case the figures had been altered. To the naked eyes they seemed quite
innocent, but Æneas, with his uncle's lens, searched closer, and he
found the paper had been scraped. Elsewhere than in the balances, too,
he found innumerable signs that a knife had plied.

“My God!" cried Alan-Iain-Alain Og, “was there ever such a robber! I
never dreamt to doubt him that way!"

“Ah, yes, but that's not all!" said Æneas, picking up the ledger and
turning round its back. “I thought some parts were a little slack, as if
a page or two had been cut out. I looked all through for the stitching,
and tried that way to count the pages in every lith, but it took a lot
of time, and, to make it easier, I stripped the back. I was half-way
through my counting, and I found some pages missing, but a thing more
startling to find was this, and I nearly missed it——!"

He showed a section sewn with black, while the thread of all the rest
was white. It had six-and-thirty pages—the last that were written on
save a single final page; half the book was blank.

“Do you see what he did?" said Æneas. “That lith of pages covers the
last six years of my father's lifetime; they were written after he
died—or rather after he disappeared!"

The Bailie took the book from him, and looked at it more closely.

“They couldna be written after he disappeared," said he, “for there, at
the end's, where he endorses—'14th November 1718, found correct,'—poor
Paul's last audit."

“But, uncle, look!" cried Æneas. “The whole six years' account as given
there is interpolated! The sheets my father audited were cut out,
another section was taken from the end of the book, filled up this way
and stitched in again before the page my father signed."

The thing was obvious! With the book dissected, Duncanson's device of
fourteen years ago became transparent, even to Annabel. All he had had
to do was to carry a certificate of audit in his own handwriting from
the foot of one stitched section to the top of another, get Paul to
superscribe it, and effect the change when he was gone. And only his
choice of black thread for the stitching had betrayed him! Except to a
strict examination the ledger would appear as honest as the day.

This startling revelation sent them now back through the whole mass of
papers from the barrel; three hours they spent in checking vouchers with
the books, to find at least two-thirds were missing, and they were still
engrossed when the big clock in the lobby struck the hour of midnight.
Its clangour scarce was finished when the door-risp grated.

Annabel and her maid had gone to bed; it was Æneas who went to the door
and let in Ninian.

“I saw by your light ye werena bedded," he said, with a glance at the
littered table and the barrel standing by. He was shivering with cold.
“If I just had the least drop spirits, Alan——"

He got a glass, which he swallowed at a gulp, and before he could take a
seat was acquaint with the knavery of the ledger. He took it all in at a
glance.

“That puts the finish on it! Was it you that thought of looking, Æneas?"
he said. “Good lad! Good stalking! Give me your hand! I never guessed ye
had so fine a barrel, Alan! Ye must agree I was pretty clever in
jalousing all along it would be papers troubled Sandy! And ye havena got
the half o' them! And ye havena got the worst! Where's the deed that
gave him right to grab Drimdorran?"

“I saw't wi' my own eyes," said the Bailie.

“Who witnessed it? What was it like?"

The Bailie clouded; his wife, in a gown, was come from her bed, and
standing looking at him.

“Out with it, man!" she said. “I can see ye made a mess of it, Alan."

It was not a deed he had seen at all. There never had been a deed. The
bond was one of honour—no more than a scrap of paper in Paul
Macmaster's handwriting, acknowledging his debt and pledging the estate
for its security. But to Alan-Iain-Alain Og, with the consciousness that
everything in any case was lost to Paul and to his family, it seemed
enough when backed up by the ledger; he had never dreamt to question it.
“I see now I was just a fool!" he said, and clenched his fists.

“Indeed and ye werena the man o' business that time, anyway," said
Ninian drily. “I doubt Paul never wrote nor signed that pledge! It was
the work of Sandy. If the book's a lie, as ye see it is, the paper was a
lie as red as hell, and that's what Sandy feared we were finding out!"

“I'll have him by the neck!" cried Alan-Iain-Alain Og in fury.

“Na, na!" said Ninian soberly. “Ye'll no' have that! There's another
twist in the cow's horn, and ye've yet to learn the last o' Sandy's
quirks."

“The whole thing goes to-morrow before MacCailein! I'll show him the man
he has!"

“He kens already."

The beachdair took a chair which Annabel pushed before him. “He kens
already," he repeated. “I spent an hour wi' Himself this evening—yonder
he was wi' his velvet coat and his pouthered heid. 'Ye havena barked
yet, Ninian?' says he; 'I'll bark when the beast's at bay!' says I; but
MacCailein didna need my barking, Duncan Forbes had barked before me.
His Grace knew all about it—the tricks of Barisdale, the traffic in the
guns, Sim's share in the Grange affair, the way we were harassed, and as
much as Duncan kens of the roguery of Duncanson. Whenever he got my
story he sent a line up to Drimdorran House; I dinna ken what he said
in't, but it meant the end of Sandy."

He turned to Æneas: “Do ye ken what I asked MacCailein?" he said. “If
there was any truth in Duncanson's story that your father clyped? His
Grace just laughed at me. Says he, 'What, Paul Macmaster! Never on
earth! The Bank of England could not buy him!'"

“I never believed one word of it!" cried Annabel. Æneas could not speak;
he was whelmed with a relief that swept away all other feelings.

Throughout, so far, was something latent in the beachdair's manner; he
had plainly more to tell, and even Annabel could see he wrought up, in
what followed, to a climax. She waited for it nervously.

When he had left the Duke, he told them, he had gone up to the dovecote,
with his mind made up to spend the night there. He had made his
preparations; bought a candle and some food, and knew exactly what he
was to do. On the night before, he had thought at first of hiding in the
bin, but finally decided on the floor above. With his knife he had cut a
hole in the floor, through which whatever happened down below would be
under his observation. He was there to watch for Duncanson. That
Duncanson would come again he was convinced; the dovecote had some
loadstone power and dragged him to it every night. At eight o'clock,
then, Ninian took up his post, leaving the lantern where it had always
hung below, with a fragment of his candle in it. He lay half dozing on
the mattress, with sacks on him, and it was bitter cold.

Hours passed, and nobody appeared. He ventured out to look what time the
stars proclaimed. The Sealgair Mór—Orion, just was tipping Cowal, and
the lesser of his dogs on leash beyond him; the hour was about eleven.
Having made the time, he turned to go back to his hiding, and on the
threshold looked up at Drimdorran House. The lights were going out! One
by one he watched the windows dim, till only three were left with a
gleam in them, and then he pricked his ears. In the house there was some
commotion; he could hear a woman screaming. People came outside and to
its front; he heard the running of a man and a voice cry after him.

“For goodness' sake!" cried Annabel, unable longer to contain herself,
“will ye no' come to the bit? What was it?"

“I knew there was something wrong," said Ninian solemnly. “I ran up to
the road and stopped him. He was going like the wind. It was the
Muileach. He was running for the doctor to his master."

“Ah-h-h! It's not the doctor I will run for but the hangman!" Alan
growled, ferocious.

“Na, na!" said Ninian, and shook his head, “ye'll no' get the chance;
he's beat ye!"

“He's deid!" cried Annabel, now sure she knew the climax.

“He's all that!" said Ninian. “He died an hour and a half ago, and my
hank's twisted yet!"




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE PORTRAIT.


Throughout the night a sudden change came on the weather. Next day there
was a fog that hid the mounts completely, narrowed every prospect to a
circle of a hundred yards. The loch was blotted out but for a leaden
margin; it seemed a scrap of town—the ruins of a fire, still
smoking—that stood at the river's mouth with a gable now and then shown
through the vapour, gullet of a lane, or figures moving vaguely on the
quay. The fishermen were out yet on the water; high above the burgh, in
the steeple, rang the bell to guide them in, and on the walls a man kept
constant drumming with a drum.

To the child of mist this fog came like a benison. Ninian breathed it
like a scent; bathed his spirit in it; felt old powers revive. It was an
extra night to him, conceded by Almighty for the beachdair's benefit.
Many a turn he took that morning through the town and up the glen,
unseen as if he had Macreevan's mantle. For once were windows useless to
a people who never saw Ninian walk along the causeway, but they looked
out after him to see where he was going. With a plaid hung loose about
his body and his hat scrugged down, he could pass within a whisper of
acquaintances unrecognised.

It would be ill to say what he was looking for; indeed he did not know
himself; but as in mists like this his folk, in the years of
persecution, found from practice speculation quicker, instincts more
acute since all their being was on edge to make up for the loss of
vision, and they became as leaves stirred by the faintest air, he hoped
the gloom of this lowering day that threw him in upon himself might send
him stumbling on something.

That morning he had bathed in ice-cold water, thinly clad himself, but
for the plaid, and eaten nothing—not a scrap! It was his father's
plan.—“Aye, Ninian, be clean, and lean, and cold, and ravenous when big
things are a-doing; then God will come to thee, and woe upon the foe!"

The death of Duncanson last night had been a blow. It was a fox gone
into earth just when the grip was on him. And with him, too, had
disappeared a hundred chances to find out his secret. No other body knew
where Paul Macmaster died, nor how, and it was doubtful if he had left a
scrap of anything for dog to fasten on. That had been Ninian's notion in
the morning; he had grown more hopeful as it passed. For he had found
out how, exactly, Duncanson had died. He had had no warning. There was
granted him no time to trample out the embers of his fire the way Clan
Alpine did in woods when they heard the cailleach-oidhche command a
scattering. There had come to him a letter; he had read it standing,
given out a cry, and fallen in a heap, to die ten minutes after.

In the suddenness of this was Ninian's hope that everything could not
yet be destroyed; he was sure it was MacCailein's letter, and at ten
o'clock, when he went up to Drimdorran House by MacCailein's orders to
seal up Duncanson's repositories, this letter was the first thing that
he asked for.

What was his amaze to have the Muileach hand it to him yet unopened, the
boar's head still intact on the red seal at its back!

“What's this?" said he. “There was another letter, then?"

And then he heard of Lovat's. A runner had come last night from
Inverness, and it was a letter from Simon Fraser that Duncanson was
reading when he fell.

“Where is it?" asked Ninian sharply. “Fetch it, Donald, fetch it!"

It changed the whole position, and yet it had less than a dozen lines.
“All I have got is the twig the fish were on," wrote Lovat. “They're
gone on the road to Inveraray, round by Ruthven. And here I can do no
more for you. I am beat to ken what your trouble is, but if it concerns
Paul Macmaster umquhile of Drimdorran, the lad's papa, they have talked
it out with Fraser, for he was shipped with them. I cannot lay hands on
him; he may be with them."

With the letter in his hand, Ninian stood in the business closet
pondering a while. He sought in its lines for what had crumbled the man
who had got it, now lying up the stair, his warfare over. It was plainly
not the news of their escape, for that was known to him already; it was
the reference to Fraser. Ninian took out his tangled hank and absently
began to pluck it, although the keys of Duncanson were there before him
on the desk.

The room was sombre, darkened by the plaid still tacked above the
window, and only half drawn over by the Muileach to let in the dim light
of the foggy day. Ninian tugged it from its fastening when the Muileach
left him to his business, and looked out into the garden. Beyond the
gravel and a plot of perished flowers was nothing visible; the fog hung
over all. From a twig of rose-bush nailed to the ribbits of the window
moisture dripped; there was a smell of mould and rotten leafage.

He turned his first attention to the desk. Everything was in the
trimmest order. It was a great, deep oak 'scretoire, its drawers filled
up with letter-books, accounts, and leases. He started at the lowest
drawer, having lit a candle; sat on the floor, and patiently went
through its whole contents. There was no need to scrutinise either
individual letters copied, or accounts; their character as a whole was
obvious: they were concerned with Islay's business. In none of the
drawers was a single document of any interest to the searcher.

It was more hopefully he opened up the flap at the top of the 'scretoire
and looked at the pigeon-holes within, but, even there, was nothing to
reward his curiosity. Bundles of letters and receipts docketed on their
backs brought Islay's business down to some weeks ago, among them
Æneas's acknowledgments of fees paid for his tutoring of Will Campbell.

Such desks had always in them nooks and slides, with what had long
become a mere pretence at secrecy; Ninian pulled at the fluted thick
partitions in between the pigeon-holes, and drew out upright drawers
that were empty—all but one, and that the last he came on, slyly
fastened with a spring it took him long to find.

There was in it a silver snuffbox, tarnished, and a strand of a woman's
hair tied up with a piece of tape.

He put the hair back where he got it, and stood up to examine the box a
little closer to the candle. When he opened it and saw a portrait on the
lid inside, he started. At first he thought it was Margaret, or her
mother, but it was neither, and yet the face, in a dim way, seemed
familiar.

“Tha i agam!—I have her!" said he at last. “Macmaster's wife!" and he
slipped it in his pocket.

Beyond this he found nothing with the slightest bearing on the former
owner of Drimdorran.

He went along the shelves that lined the room; took out more business
books and looked at them; at the back of the topmost shelf he found a
plan of the estate, a list of farm stock, and a letter of Paul
Macmaster's, all tied together in a roll. The letter he read with
interest, and pocketed.

On the desk and on the chamber door he put a seal, and it was afternoon
when he went home, his business finished.

To the food which his daughter put before him he did little more than
give a stirring on the plate; he fed on cogitations. It was not till she
told him Æneas and his uncle had been calling for him that he saw she
was, herself, absorbed and troubled, something remote, detached, and
apprehensive in her manner. It was plain she had been weeping. What
thoughts of her and Æneas had been waked in him by the hint of Forbes at
Bunchrew he had stifled up till now as soon as they arose; an awkward
shyness made him shrink from prying. But this unquiet anxiety of hers
demanded settlement; this time he shook off diffidence, and took-to
Gaelic, as he must when tender things were uppermost.

“Ar't a little dipped in love, lass oh?" he asked her slyly, with a bold
dash at the point which approached more delicately he probably would
have shied from at the last.

She got on the instant in a flame of colour. It was the first time he
had ever shown a sign that he expected her some day to be a woman with a
life of her own apart from him.

“As deep's Dunchuach!" she said in passion: if she had not said it so
she should have lied.

“Tach!" said her father, wondering to find this awkward business so
simple after all, “thou'rt just a slip of a lass, and that disease is
not enduring. Take sleep and buttermilk, and a cooler day will come, and
another fellow. This one's just as poor's the tongs."

“And that's the very thing I like about him!" she cried. “And you would
make of him a laird!"

“Well," he said, “that's what it looks like. If I could just get the
truth of his father's end——"

“I hope you never will!" she cried.

He jumped to his feet. “My soul," said he in English, “wasn't I the
burraidh not to see it sooner! You're thinking to yourself the house
is big up yonder in the glen, and will want a great big moneyed woman.
You're thinking that you're good enough to wed the tongs, but too small
for Drimdorran. Fie, shame on ye, Macgregor, child of kings! The rock is
not more old than us, nor yet the mountain. There's not one blemish on
our tree, and you will make me feel a dog that child of mine should
think herself not good enough for a Macmaster, even if he wore the
banners!"

“Stop, stop!" she cried, ashamed; “you go too fast for me. For all that
there is between us—just a word!"

“There's not much need for words at the age of you; it's in the eyes,
and I have seen him look at you in yon bit coach of Duncan's till my
face was blazing. By God, you'll marry him! And it's not the tongs will
do for Ninian Campbell's daughter!"

The upper buttons of his waistcoat burst; he was inflamed and swollen
with injured pride. She picked up one that fell to the floor and
polished it along her sleeve; she stood abashed like a little child.

“You put me to my shame, father!" she said.

“Yes," he cried, “and you put me to my shame that you should harbour
fancy for a lad as poor's a dish-clout, and turn from him with your tail
between your legs when you find he's like to be a landed gentleman. The
one thing I will not have in child of mine is that she should be humble!
I would sooner have you wicked! I would sooner have you dead! My grief!
are you not Macgregor?"

“But I am not humble!" she said. “It is because I am proud I do not want
a man to marry me because he may think it is his duty, and he is just
the man that, having gone so far, would do it. So long as he was poor I
had no doubt of him, and I was happy. I would have followed him across
the world, but you are going to spoil him for me, bringing back to him
Drimdorran. How am I to tell now that he wants me for myself? I'm
frightened, father—frightened!"

Ninian rubbed his chin. “My loss!" said he, “that your mother was not to
the fore; she maybe could have understood ye! Ye beat me! But one thing
I'm determined on—ye'll marry him! An hour ago I couldna let myself
think o' ye marryin' anybody, but now we've got this length my mind's
made up,—I'll never rest till I get proof that Sandy killed his father:
that's all that's needed now to get Drimdorran for him. He's bound to
marry ye! If I clear this business of his father's up he's under an
obligation."

“Oh," she cried, and wrung her hands, “that's just what tortures me! I
want no man who's under an obligation, or might think he was!"

She flung from the room in a rage of indignation.

He went round to the Bailie's house. Æneas was out; he had spent the
whole day calling upon men who had been friendly with his father to see
if any one by chance had had a correspondence with his father after he
had gone to France. His uncle went to a man who had been skipper of a
barque and knew the port of Havre. MacIver was his name; he had sailed
for twenty years with fish in their season to the place and knew what
Scottish merchants lived there. In all his time he had never known of
one Macfarlane; there had been no such Scottish merchant fourteen years
ago in Havre.

“I knew it all along," said Ninian, when the Bailie told him this. “It
was the lie of a desperate man, no more in it than there was in the
charge that Paul was turncoat. Duncanson was lying right and left,
enough to make the green rocks cry. He had your brother killed! And he
lost no time about it either. Paul never spent a year in France—the
thing's ridiculous! Do you think, Alan, the brother of your blood with a
boy here waiting on him would not find some means to get a letter to you
in a twelvemonth?"

“But Duncanson would burn them," said Annabel.

“Supposing he did? That might work for a month or two but no' for a year
on end. When Paul got no reply from you to the letters he sent through
Sandy, he would be a stupid man that didna jalouse something and try
another post."

“That's true!" said the Bailie. “There was many a way he might have
written us. There was, for one, MacIver."

“But he didna write ye. What way? Because he was dead! That flashed on
me the other night when Æneas told me Sandy's story. There was never a
penny of Drimdorran rents sent into France the second time; your brother
was killed as soon's he got there."

He produced the letter from Paul he had found in Drimdorran House. It
had come from Leith with bank-notes paying back a loan with interest.
They searched the ledger and found the loan still debited to Paul. It
was among the very last of the advances made by Duncanson, and the
absence of any allusion to a balance showed that all that had preceded
had been also paid.

“That's all I found up-by in Sandy's closet that had the least concern
with Paul's affairs. The old rogue—peace be wi' him!—made a clearance.
Not a scrap is left to help us. But here's a thing—how came the old man
to have this?"

He handed Annabel the snuffbox.

She knew it at once. “Paul's!" she cried with agitation, and opened up
the lid. “And that is his wife, my dear Selina."

It was, of all they had lost with Paul, the one thing they had most
regretted. To him it had been extravagantly precious. And that Duncanson
should have kept it from them seemed the most cruel of his villainies.

“But how came he to have it?" asked Ninian. “That's what puzzled me.
It's not a thing a man would forget at a flitting nor make a gift of to
his factor."

“Never on earth!" said Annabel. “I can not think what way that man
should have it."

“There was with it a bit of a woman's hair; it was hers, I'll swear. Now
what would a man like Duncanson keep these things in his desk for?"

Annabel sighed. “He was one time very fond of her," she said. “Alan, ye
remember, told ye?"

“Tach!" said Ninian. “That's a woman's reason, and there's no' much in
it. Half the blunders people make come out of thinking life is like a
story or a song. It's not! It's grim and crooked! A man like Sandy hadna
room in his body for two affections—a dead lass, and a lump of land. He
had some other reason for having the box and making such fraca about its
loss when he thought her son had taken it. Where did he get it? When did
he get it? Tell me that and I'm at the end of my bit string! If Paul had
the box with him at Glenshiel we're comin' close on the very hand that
slew him. Was it sent from France?"

He gave a start as he asked the question, and beat his breast. “My
grief!" he cried, “aren't we the fools to believe one word of Sandy's
story when we have proved so much of it is false? Was Paul in France at
all? Did he ever get out of Scotland? That's the thing I should have
questioned from the first! If Paul was killed abroad, and the box in his
possession, nobody would think of sending it to Duncanson. What for
should they?"

“He might never have taken it with him to France," said Alan-Iain-Alain
Og.

“Na, na!" said his wife. “Ye needna say such a thing to me! Wherever
Paul went in the body, he had Selina's picture. He kept it like a watch
below his pillow."

“Oh, man! if I were only sure he had it in the North!" said Ninian with
eagerness, and turned as he said so to the opening door. Æneas entered,
looking wearied: he had tramped for hours all round the country, and the
first thing that his eyes fell on was the tarnished box he knew in his
uncle's hand. He learned with amazement that the portrait was his
mother's; he had never seen another.

“That I should not have guessed!" he said as he looked at it again, with
moistened eyes. “And now, quite plain, I see myself in her as Lovat
did."

Ninian glowered. “What's that ye say?" he shouted. “Did Lovat see this
picture?"

“He did indeed, unless there chance to be another."

“There never was!" said Annabel. “And that's what made me long for't
many a day."

“Then," said Æneas, “Lovat saw it. He saw it with my father that time at
Castle Dounie."

“Are ye sure?" asked Ninian.

“He told me so himself at his dinner-table. You might have heard him.
And how, now, comes it in Drimdorran House?"

“I'll tell ye before I'm five hours older!" said the beachdair; picked
up his hat, and without another word was gone.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE COBBLER'S SONG.


He dashed home, spattering through the dubs, for now the rain was
falling; found his daughter absent; opened a press, and got a pair of
shoes, his own, much worn. These were each thrust in a deep skirt-pocket
of his coat, and away he went to the house of a cobbler near the jail.

“Here's a pair of shoes," he said; “put thou fresh heels on them, just
man, that I can walk in grandeur. I want them for Drimdorran's funeral."

The cobbler was an old wee man with grizzled whiskers, and lips for ever
puckered up for whistling. He was a bard, made ditties, mostly
scurrilous, which were sung in taverns. As he sat on a stool and
hammered leather on a lap-stone, Ninian set him chanting at a song. It
was about a tenant in the glen, and a horse he had neither bred nor
bought, yet brought in a cunning way to market; the poet clearly hinted
theft.

“Capital!" cried Ninian. “A splendid song! Many a time, I'm sure, it put
a fury on Mackellar. It's a long time now since I heard it last, on a
Hogmanay. It came into my head to-day, and I just was wondering to
myself did he steal the horse in truth, or was it poetry."

“I'll warrant thee he stole him!" said the bard. “Or else he were a
warlock brute got from the waters."

“When was this?" asked Ninian sharply.

“It was twelve—ay, fourteen years ago," said the cobbler. “Son of the
Worst! he got a pair of shoes from me when he had drink, and would he
pay them, sober? No! I put it before my Maker and was stirred to song.
Many a time since then would Mackellar rather he had paid the shoes!"

The beachdair left the cobbler in a hurry, and through the driving
rain went up to a farm at Tullich. It was Mackellar's farm. The man who
had paid so dearly for his shoes was on the hill, but returned in a
little while, and Ninian questioned him for nigh an hour.

When he got back to town it was the gloaming. A gale was risen; the
woods were rocking, and the rain came down in sheets. It drenched him to
the marrow, but he went, all dripping as he was, to Alan-Iain-Alain
Og's, and who was come before him but his daughter? Only a desperate
interest in his movements would have brought her there.

One word he said when he went in beside them in the room—one word only,
in a cry, his face like flint, his hand uplifted.

The word was “Havock!"

Between his teeth it sounded like a snarl.

They stood about him as he dripped; a pool ran on the carpet.

“At last," he cried, “I have him! It's well he has the linen on his
chin, or he would squeal upon the trestles! Now I ken what for he did
not like the night and must have candles! Your father, Æneas, filled the
dark; outside the candle-light, night roared for vengeance!"

“What did he do to my father?" Æneas cried, trembling.

“He did what I said he did—he killed him! Somewhere in this parish lie
your father's bones! Sit down the whole of us, and I'll tell ye how
things happened. I'll take my string."

He took out the line so curiously employed to mark his progress in
unravelling the secret.

“The way to find out what a rogue would do in a given habble is to be a
rogue yourself. In every one of us there is the stuff of roguery as well
as grace; good fortune to us if we needna use it! And I said to myself,
'Now, Ninian, if you were Duncanson and bogged so deep in mischief, what
lengths would ye go to clear your neck?' Duncanson wanted Drimdorran,
and when he couldna get it by fair play he tried the foul. For weeks he
thought that Paul was drowned, and before he learned the truth he had
put his head into the hemp. He hashed and haggled at the books; he
forged Paul's name; he grabbed the property. And then, mo creach! he
got a staggerer! He was no sooner in Drimdorran, laird, and his chair
drawn to the fire, than a messenger came one day from the North with
dreadful tidings. Paul Macmaster was alive! He was there in the North,
with Lovat! He might appear at any hour, though he was papered, and find
out how he had been wronged!

“I put myself in his position. 'What's to be done?' I asked the rogue of
me. I was there, Drimdorran, at my window, looking out upon my lands,
wi' not a crop yet from them, and a letter in my hand, and I saw the
scaffold. When a body will see the scaffold he deserves, it's pity him
his bowels! there is nothing he will shirk to save him. And I said to
myself (for mind ye I was Duncanson!), 'There is only one thing for
it—Paul must go!'

“Now, how could this be managed? I thought of Simon. Lovat could have
shipped him to oblige a friend, the way he shipped yourself and me,
Æneas; but he wasna asked, and that of itself looks black. It meant that
Duncanson could not feel safe with Paul alive, even though the ocean lay
between them. He must die! Lovat is a bad man, and some day he will
suffer for it, but he's not the one to risk his neck in a dirty murder
for another man, though he'll stretch a point to do kidnappin', and
Duncanson must do the deed himsel'. Your brother never went to France,
Alan: he meant to go, but first he meant to come to Inveraray. For a
while it puzzled me that Lovat should be ignorant that Paul came this
way, but I think that now I have the reason. Paul couldna trust him. No
man wi' his wits about him ever sat wi' Sim a day without seeing he was
a quirky one. Paul would look at that sly face and mind old Lovat's
history, and say to himself, 'This man runs double; if he thinks I'm
venturin' home he'll inform, and they will watch for me.' So he never
said a word of Inveraray."

“But all this," broke out Bailie Alan, “is but speculation! What makes
ye think Paul came to Inveraray?"

“He would never pass this door without a cry on us!" said Annabel.

Ninian shook his head. “That's the very bit!" he said. “I thought of
that mysel'. Here were his kin and offspring, and his heart was warm,
and he was going to banishment. Would he go past this house at night and
not come in? . . . He never passed! The whole thing lies before me like
a strath seen from the mountain-top: your brother came down the glen,
but never got any farther. . . . Have ye a bite of bread? I've tasted
nothing all this day, and now I'm like the wolf."

Annabel put bread before him and some milk.

“But are ye sure, Ninian, that he came this way at all?" the Bailie
asked, still doubting.

“As sure as I hear the wave beat on the shore, there! When he left
Castle Dounie he made straight for here, and met with Duncanson. How did
Sandy have the box? When ye told me, Æneas, that Lovat saw the picture
with your father, I knew the worst—that Sandy had destroyed him with
his own hand! I knew then what the letter meant that Lovat wrote to
Duncanson and brought the death to him—he was afraid of Fraser. That
man in the Muir of Ord knew something. He must be shipped with us, if
Duncanson would sleep.

“Now, I had the good sense to ask the wife of Fraser for his history.
Fourteen years ago he was a man of Lovat's. He carried letters. I
thought, when she told me that, of Duncanson, and asked if her man had
carried letters to Argyllshire. She told me he had once been there, and
it was to Duncanson, with a letter from a gentleman Macmaster. He
brought an answer back, and she knew the very day and date; a child was
born to her that morning."

“Ah, the poor body!" said Annabel.

“Well, I thought to myself, 'What was that letter? And what for should
Sandy want that man trepanned?' I looked at it like this—Paul had
affairs with Sandy; he was going abroad; he wanted money; he wrote to
Duncanson, his doer, and asked for it. But the thing was far past money
with Duncanson; the crying need was death. Oh, man! I saw it all like
print! Duncanson said, 'Yes, ye'll have the money; come and get it.' And
your father, Æneas, never doubted Sandy. He came to Inveraray! He darena
come by day, for his name was at the cross and on the doors o' kirks; he
came down that glen in dark, and he met with Sandy under cloud of night.
Where did they meet? In Drimdorran House?"

“Never on earth!" cried Annabel. “Paul wouldna put a foot in't."

“And that was a thing I thought of, too. They met, I'll swear, in the
glen! And then I ask the rogue of me what happened. The scaffold loomed
for Duncanson. He had got a property by crime. Here was the only
witness, nothing but his breath to make him dangerous. . . . He killed
your brother, Alan, there and then!"

“I canna believe it!" cried the Bailie.

“I'm just as sure as if I saw it! It's what I would do myself if I were
him. Consider, Alan—search yourself for the savage in you,—here is a
glen in dark and loneliness, and a hunted man condemned by law who may
bring ye to the scaffold. What for have we got pistol or the dirk except
to use them for our own particular skins? . . . Somewhere in Glen Aray,
Æneas, your father died! That box was taken from your father's corpse;
to keep it was the worst mistake of Sandy."

“You have still produced no evidence that he came here," said Æneas, who
was pallid.

“But I have plenty!" said the beachdair. “A dead man can be buried, or
thrown in a linn with a stone tied to his neck, but a horse is not so
easy hidden. Your father borrowed a horse from Lovat and never sent it
back. What happened to the horse? . . . You ken the tenant in
Tullich—Ellar-an-Eich? It came to me this day, that his by-name came
from a song made on him by the cobbler. I knew it but in parts, and I
went to the cobbler and made him sing it. It all rose out of a horse
Mackellar said he found astray, and nobody believed him. So I went up to
Tullich. 'Fourteen years ago,' I says, 'a horse was lost. You sold,
about that time, a horse at Kilmichael market, and I'm curious to ken
just where ye got it.'

“He told me there and then. What he said from the first was true—it was
a wandered horse, and he found it on a Sunday in his corn, a wise-like,
well-bred saddle-beast, without a strap on. He put it in his stable for
a fortnight, with never a word to any one about his find. It was the
very week Paul rode from Inverness; a fortnight later came Kilmichael
market, and Mackellar rode it there in night-time—thirty miles, and got
twenty Saxon pounds for it. Of course the thing came out; the whole land
kent of it; the cobbler made his song, and the droll thing was there was
never a cheep in the shire of a missing horse!

“There's no mistake about it, Alan; that was Lovat's horse, the one he
lent your brother! And here's the copestone of it—Lovat told ye, Æneas,
at his table, that your father, later on, through Duncanson, sent the
value of the beast. Your father never did, poor man! The money came out
of Sandy's pocket, and he little guessed that after fourteen years the
lie would rise against him. Sandy heard, like all the rest, that a horse
was found in Tullich, but he never said a word. Yet he paid the value of
the horse to Lovat! . . . 'I didna hear ye bark!' MacCailein said. If
Duncanson was living now there would be barking, for I have everything
except the corp of the man he killed. I see the whole thing but the
blow! Was it the dirk or pistol?"

“I canna follow ye!" said Alan-Iain-Alain Og, confused.

“Then I'll make it plainer for ye, Alan, and I'll start again wi' Paul
in Castle Dounie. He knew he must henceforth stay abroad, and the
quicker he was gone the better. Of all the realm of Albyn this parish
was most dangerous for him; let him show in Inveraray and his kail was
cooked. But he was bound to come here for two things—first to see his
child, and next, for money. He wrote to Duncanson to fix a meeting;
Fraser took the letter, and brought back an answer. The place of meeting
and the hour were fixed. It must be in the night, ye'll mind! Paul
darena venture here in daytime. And I wouldna say, when I think of it,
but Sandy warned him no' to give his plans to Lovat; that's what I would
do in plotting murder. So Paul set out on the borrowed horse wi' the
silver-mounted saddle.

“He came over Glen Aray in the dark, and his foe was waiting. It was
somewhere in the glen; it couldna be Drimdorran. He took Macmaster
unawares, with dag or dagger, and I'll swear it was the dagger in the
back, for that's the Clan Maclean! Then he riped the dead man's pouches;
got, with other things, the snuffbox; lest earth or water should give up
the body he must leave no single thing on it to show that it was Paul's.
What he did with the body God Almighty knows, and the woods are wide and
thick, and Aray deep, but he put with it the harness of the horse, and
lashed the brute back on the road it came. It went into Mackellar's corn
that morning, and good for us it did, and that the cobbler made a song!"

All this the beachdair gave in gusts that left no chance for question;
he was like a man possessed. The steam rose from his clothing; a flush
was on his cheek-bones, and his knees were trembling; Janet stared at
him with a face white as the cannoch.

And none of them for a while could speak.

Æneas was first to find his tongue in a stifled way.

“I'm thinking of the doocot," he said, and Janet flinched, with her
father's eye on her.

“I'll warrant ye I thought of that, but there's nothing in the doocot,
and it stands on rock."

“It's just the very place that Paul himsel' would fix on for a tryst,"
said Alan. “Many a night they spent beside its fire."

Ninian gave a start. “That's just what I was goin' to ask," he said. “Ye
talked before about a fire, but fire was never there unless it was a
chaffer."

“It wasna any chaffer, but a fireplace and a chimney; I've dried my feet
at it when I was at the hares; ye'll see't unless you're blind."

Ninian jumped to his feet. “Blind, indeed!" said he. “But I have my
nose! Æneas, did I no' tell ye I could smell the soot? And now I must go
up and look again."

“Let me go with you," Æneas said.

“Na, na! You'll just take Jennet home, and I'll come back again. I'll
not can sleep till this is settled."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

DIRK.


Of them all there was no one more disturbed by Ninian's story and the
stress of his emotions than his daughter. She was so wan and broken when
he left them, Annabel took pity, motherly wrapped her up in a hood, and
made Æneas convoy her home. It was nine o'clock; rain teemed; the street
was quite deserted; melancholy drenched the night. And there and then,
as they went through it, she with a hand on the crook of his arm, it
seized on Æneas that all of steadfastness for him, security, and faith,
were, in this vexed and mocking world, dependent upon her. All else was
meantime reeling for him, he walked on quicksands; every hour brought
some new consternation, and now he had a fresh one—he was not so sure
of her feelings to him as he had dared at times to be. Like Annabel, he
scented doubts. Could the horror of the crimes her father tracked have
influenced the change in her?—she was aloof, evasive, and yet, two
nights ago, she stood surrendered in his arms!

“What is it ails you?" he asked her suddenly. They were come to her
doorstep; another moment and she was gone unless he acted quickly.

“I'm tired," she said. “I'm in a stupor. This dreadful business——"

Remorse took hold of him. “I know, my dear," he said; “I know! It would
shake the rock, and I am a fool to think you could be calmer than
myself. Just for a little, there, I had a fear that I was grown
distasteful to you."

His hand was on her shoulder. A fanlight on the doorway dimly lit the
porch from a lamp within. The gale blew up the lane with noises of the
sea; they occupied a privacy of storm. The crimson hood was slipped back
from her head, and her face was wet with rain. Her eyes were troubled;
she was dumb; he drew her close to him; she leaned against him for a
moment, and he felt a wild heart-flutter, and then she shrank back from
him, pushing with her hands against his breast.

“No, no!" she whispered; “that is by with! My far-too-clever father has
put an end to that!" and Æneas was dismayed.

“Has he, faith?" he said, and bridled. “I feared what you might think,
but I never dreamt your father would let that affect him."

“What!" she asked in wonder.

“This—this nightmare in my history, my father's downfall; this
appalling mystery. What blame have I? Am I the worse a man for it that
you or yours should shun me like a plague? It's not what I would look
for from Macgregors—God knows your people, like my own, have died in
ugly ways. But I'll have it out with him! This thing is far more vital
to me than his search for bones."

At this she changed immediately. Distant no more, she nestled to him.
“Æneas," she whispered, “you know my father just as little as I knew you
till now! Forget what I said; it was all in error."

Her face was cold and wet; the rain was in her hair; his own face,
burning, found in their contact, in their moisture, in their chill, a
delight that was almost aching. It is in fires that love is withered,
but not in fires that keep a surface damp and cool with clean night-air
and storm, and Æneas with his lips on her, drank bliss.

“How can we—how can we be happy?" she gasped at last. “At such a
time! Are we not wicked?"

“No," said Æneas gravely; “the world must aye go on. Weeping may endure
a night for death and wrong, but love's the morning; we begin afresh.
And you will think me a strange man that every fresh discovery of your
father's makes me the sorrier for that poor wretch who surely never knew
what love was, and can never learn it now. It was not my father's life
was marred, but Duncanson's; my father's death was glorious compared
with his, even if it were as your father thinks. It's for the sake of
that poor clay I hope it wasna."

“You may be sure my father's right," said Janet quietly. “This time
he'll find what he is wanting."

“In the doocot?"

She nodded.

“Tell me why you say so."

“I know! I have known it for a week."

“But how?" he cried.

“For not one reason you will listen to, Æneas, but the foolish first was
that I loathed the doocot. I hated it since ever I guessed that you were
there that night with Margaret, and when my father told me how your
troubles started there, I seemed in a flash to see what Duncanson had
done. My father might talk about France and your father dying there, but
someway I could think of nothing but the doocot, and Duncanson's cold
fishy hand. Believe me, Æneas, that's where your father lies!"

He soothed her agitation; she was shaken like a leaf. “You should have
told your father what you thought," he urged, but gently.

“I daren't!" she said. “I was afraid. I hoped he never would discover;
my happiness looked like depending on his not discovering. And you need
not ask me now for why; I'm too ashamed to tell you. Some day——"

“Ah, never mind!" he said in a gush of sudden pity at her turmoil.

He had no faith in her intuitions, and even from Ninian's search
expected little. When he got back to the house, he found them there of
the same opinion—that the beachdair's reasoning had gaps in it
patched up with mere surmise.

But the first glance at Ninian's face, when he returned, confounded
them. It was grey as ashes. He looked at Annabel strangely, and she left
the room.

“Well," said Æneas, sick at the heart, “did you find anything further?"

“Mo croach! I did, Drimdorran!" Ninian answered. “Sit you down; my
hank's unravelled."

“Was it there?" cried Æneas. The name that Ninian gave him was
portentous.

“No other place!" said Ninian, solemn. “The first thing you will do,
Drimdorran, is, destroy that tower. Leave not a stone of it upon
another!"

He sat with his hands on his lap and stared at the fire; the gale
whooped in the chimney.

“One thing I overlooked," he said, “and it was very stupid of me. It
never crossed my mind that Duncanson could build, though I kent he had
some skill with the saw and hammer. It was his own hand blocked the
pigeon-holes. The only wright about the place at the time was old
Carmichael, and he never knew the place was boarded up. And Duncanson it
was who planted trees about the doocot; would he no' be better just to
pull it down? That's a thing I should have asked mysel' to start wi'.
Another mistake I made was not to trust my nose that I smelled the soot.
When first you talked about a fire, Alan, I thought ye meant a chaffer
in the middle of the floor, for I saw no sign of chimney or fireplace in
the walls——"

“But the fire was there! I know!" said the Bailie.

“Of course it was! I found it half an hour ago. He had built the
fireplace up! I found the very trowel he had used to spread his mortar!
He built it up with rubble, pushed the bin against the place, and locked
the door for fourteen years. But, my God! ye canna lock a door on time
or terror! No wonder he kept the plaid tacked on his window in the
latter days, with yon tomb before his eyes, a monument o' the man he
murdered! . . . I took a pick, when I found the place, and broke the
wall, and the first thing I came on was a rotten saddle."

He held out his hand on a sudden; on its palm was a piece of metal.

“I cut that from the leather," he said; “it's part of the silver
mounting—a buck's head wi' a motto—Lovat's crest!"

“And—and was there more?" asked Æneas, parched.

“There was," the beachdair answered. “At least your father may rest at
the last in good Scots clods; it was what I said—the dirk!"

THE END.


